Add RFC for Continuous Deployment (#128)
alphagov/govuk-rfcs: rfc-128-continuous-deployment.md

> **We won't check alerts.** At the time of writing, we have no evidence that checking Icinga alerts has any advantage over the checks discussed below. We can investigate such a check if we find evidence [[1](https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-puppet/pull/10597)].

> **We will only consider _live_ code.** Interactions due to manual and scheduled tasks can be checked manually, using a branch deployment. In the worst case, we should have ample time to fix any faults that develop.

#### Check: Internal repo tests pass (i.e. features are tested in detail)

For the purpose of automating deployments:

- We will use code coverage as our indicator of previous, thorough testing. While an app may have a [rigorous testing strategy](https://github.com/alphagov/content-publisher/blob/69bed3535de1e65bda9d5909a3bc56a319e46576/docs/testing-strategy.md), it's hard to know if this has been applied consistently as the app has evolved.

- We will require a minimum level of coverage that is realistic for all of our apps. We will not pursue this once CD is enabled, as doing so could encourage [a lack of rigour in the way we write our tests](https://jeroenmols.com/blog/2017/11/28/coveragproblem/).

> - We will not check coverage of periphery code e.g. CSS, JavaScript. This is because it has a low footprint in our codebases, and it's hard to measure coverage for: the frameworks we use don't support it.

Reviewer: I'm not sure what "the frameworks we use don't support it" means, as we do have JS tests in our frontends. Do you mean specifically that our _coverage_ tools doesn't support JS code coverage? Cc @alex-ju

> - We will not check coverage of periphery code e.g. CSS, JavaScript. This is because it has a low footprint in our codebases, and it's hard to measure coverage for: the frameworks we use don't support it.

Author: @bilbof yes, there's no change there. The intent of this caveat is to say that we won't mandate the existence or volume of testing for periphery code as part of enabling CD for an app.

One way to be more rigorous with "periphery" and "low footprint" would be to say it should be non-declarative and constitute no more than X% of the codebase <- getting a bit complicated!

But it does worry me that JavaScript constitutes 17% of the code in Finder Frontend, for example.

This is where we may have to make a tough decision: I think JS is really the only code we're concerned about, but as far as I know, there's no way to measure coverage for it due to the test framework we use (jasmine-rails). While we could start down the road of rewriting it in (frankly) a better framework, my suggestion is that we just don't have enough bespoke JS code in each app to justify making coverage of it a criteria for enabling CD.

This is where I'd like some help from everyone:

- @alex-ju and @kevindew have better knowledge about our JS testing woes than me. Am I right that: (a) we're heavily invested in jasmine-rails; and (b) there's no way to get coverage stats for it?

- @chao-xian does that clarify this for you? If so, I can try to suggest some different words for the RFC. Also, do you know of instances where we've deployed broken JS code?

> - We will not check coverage of periphery code e.g. CSS, JavaScript. This is because it has a low footprint in our codebases, and it's hard to measure coverage for: the frameworks we use don't support it.

Reviewer 2: @benthorner yes, whilst we still make use of asset-pipeline we need a JS test suite that works with it, our options are quite limited in that regard hence Jasmine. I'm not aware of it being easy to get Jasmine coverage - a quick google seems to show that you end up wrapped in karma for that, which likely pulls us out of the Ruby asset-pipeline world.

> - We will not check coverage of periphery code e.g. CSS, JavaScript. This is because it has a low footprint in our codebases, and it's hard to measure coverage for: the frameworks we use don't support it.

Reviewer: @benthorner It does - thanks. Static is an example where the cookies code did have bugs going out iirc. Maybe increased coverage for JS in specific apps might be a thing to consider including Finder Fronntend.

> - We will not check coverage of periphery code e.g. CSS, JavaScript. This is because it has a low footprint in our codebases, and it's hard to measure coverage for: the frameworks we use don't support it.

Author: Thanks for your thoughts @kevindew and @chao-xian. I had a look at the cookie bug you mentioned, which I believe refers to [this PR](https://github.com/alphagov/static/pull/2258), which doesn't seem to have any tests around it <- a bad sign!

Looking at Static got me interested in the general presence of JS across our apps. I managed to hack together a way of getting JS code coverage stats, but it's definitely not something we'd want to do normally! It's very tedious to apply the method, but I've done it for all apps where JS is 5%+ of their codebase (according to GitHub). Otherwise, I just checked if there were at least some JS tests. Here's what I found:

- Collections - 7.9% - 71% coverage [[1](https://github.com/alphagov/collections/pull/2030)]
- Collections Publisher - 4.9% - has some tests [[1](https://github.com/alphagov/collections-publisher/tree/master/spec/javascripts)]
- Content Publisher - 9.8% - 69% coverage [[1](https://github.com/alphagov/content-publisher/pull/2186)]
- ⚠ Content Tagger - 3.7% - evidence of tests [[1](https://github.com/alphagov/content-tagger/blob/b385b91b3f512257ee6f8061c34c99c89fbfe845/spec/features/tag_a_page_spec.rb#L77)]
- Email Alert Frontend - 2.5% - has some tests [[1](https://github.com/alphagov/email-alert-frontend/tree/master/spec/javascripts)]
- ⚠ Feedback - 2.5% - evidence of tests [[1](https://github.com/alphagov/feedback/blob/dbb3f16b7505ff87b62301c7d397713442cd8a6d/spec/controllers/contact/govuk/problem_reports_controller_spec.rb#L99)]
- Frontend - 6.5% - 93% coverage [[1](https://github.com/alphagov/frontend/pull/2499)]
- Finder Frontend - 14.5% - 90% coverage [[1](https://github.com/alphagov/finder-frontend/pull/2264)]
- Government Frontend - 3.6% - has some tests [[1](https://github.com/alphagov/government-frontend/tree/master/spec/javascripts)]
- ⚠ Licence Finder - 7.4% - no tests!!
- Manuals Frontend - 19.6% - 95% coverage [[1](https://github.com/alphagov/manuals-frontend/pull/991)]
- Manuals Publisher - 1.2% - has some tests [[1](https://github.com/alphagov/manuals-publisher/tree/master/spec/javascripts)]
- Maslow - 2.1% - has some tests [[1](https://github.com/alphagov/maslow/tree/master/spec/javascripts)]
- Publisher - 8.5% - 61% coverage [[1](https://github.com/alphagov/publisher/pull/1361)]
- ⚠ Search Admin - 1.3% - no tests!!
- Service Manual Frontend - 29.5% - 59% coverage [[1](https://github.com/alphagov/service-manual-frontend/pull/795)]
- Signon - 1.1% - has some tests [[1](https://github.com/alphagov/signon/tree/master/spec/javascripts)]
- Service Manual Publisher - 7.5% - 50% coverage [[1](https://github.com/alphagov/service-manual-publisher/pull/862)]
- ⚠ Specialist Publisher - 1.2% - no tests!!
- ⚠ Static - 70.6% - ?? (technique didn't work, too many unresolvable test errors)
- Transition - 5% - 88% coverage [[1](https://github.com/alphagov/transition/pull/1012)]
- Travel Advice Publisher - 2.3% - has some tests [[1](https://github.com/alphagov/travel-advice-publisher/tree/master/spec/javascripts)]
- Whitehall - 3.8% - has some tests [[1](https://github.com/alphagov/whitehall/tree/master/test/javascripts)]

My opinion: not great, but not terrible either. One thing I'd like to re-emphasise is that this RFC is primarily about the safety of enabling continuous deployment our apps. With that in mind, I'd like to propose a compromise:

- Replace "periphery code" with JavaScript. I don't think we have any specific concerns around "CSS testing" (there is no such thing, outside of all the kinds of test we have at the moment).

- Require that every app with JS code has at least one JS test. This is because a lack of any tests for the language sets a bad precedent. Feature testing is not a reasonable substitute for actual JS tests.

- Require that Static has 95%+ JS coverage.

@chao-xian does that sound reasonable to you? I'd also like to get thoughts from @alex-ju 👋.

> - We will not check coverage of periphery code e.g. CSS, JavaScript. This is because it has a low footprint in our codebases, and it's hard to measure coverage for: the frameworks we use don't support it.

Reviewer 3: TL;DR – I'm happy with the content of this RFC, maybe referring to JavaScript and CSS as 'periphery code' is indeed not a great idea as some people may feel offended, but otherwise all good.

Thoughts on this section:

> We will not check coverage of periphery code e.g. CSS, JavaScript. [...]

One thing to add is that given we use progressive enhancement at GDS, feature tests are meant to cover both scenarios: with JavaScript disable and enabled. This will ensure the main user journeys are covered with tests regardless of the level of UI enhancement done with JavaScript.

> [...] This is because it has a low footprint in our codebases, [...]

As an aside, I would argue that the recent designs ask for more and more JavaScript, which although is against our principles of keeping things simple it's a reality and it's very likely that the footprint will increase over time. This being said I would use the progressive enhancement approach is a stronger argument than the footprint size.

> [..] and it's hard to measure coverage for: the frameworks we use don't support it.

The fact that it's harder to measure JavaScript coverage is true, as the current setup doesn't allow us to do this with ease, but debatable: We can potentially use Instanbul and Jest (which relies on the same Istanbul instrumenter loader for coverage), we have Yarn and use npm packages in a few projects already (govuk_publishing_components, content-publisher, finder-frontend to name a couple of them), but we're only halfway through in having a proper setup and this requires time, mandate and consensus on the approach.

Following my hopefully relevant comments, I would be very keen on having a coverage threshold for our JavaScript tests, but I'm afraid we're not there yet with our setup.

> Require that Static has 95%+ JS coverage.

Not sure what this rule is meant to support in the current context where JavaScript is being moved from `static` to `govuk_publishing_components` and most of the JavaScript code in `static` is used for analytics and is mainly spaghetti – and not in a tasty, high-in-carbs way 🍝 . I can argue that we should aim for all projects to have 95% JavaScript coverage, but that doesn't mean people will jump into adding tests for legacy code that is not even modular.

> - We will not check coverage of periphery code e.g. CSS, JavaScript. This is because it has a low footprint in our codebases, and it's hard to measure coverage for: the frameworks we use don't support it.

Author: Thanks for your thoughts @alex-ju! I'm glad we've got some FE perspective on this, and I do indeed intend to reword this caveat. And yes, while we continue to use Rails+JS (without Webpacker), there is no general, simple approach to measuring coverage (that I can find). This is a good point to emphasise a couple of things:

- The safety criteria in this RFC are just that: a set of rules to help prevent us doing something reckless. While we are committing to automatic deployments, we should prioritise this against alternatives, like replacing Static.

- The safety criteria need to be measurable. While we should be testing code with/out progressive enhancement, there's no way to measure this. The fact that we have some tests for progressive enhancement is reassuring, but it's still unclear just how much JS in a repo is actually tested, without adopting some kind of measure for it.

I think we're basically in agreement, though. What do you think about the following to replace the current text:

- We will require some evidence of JavaScript testing, but we will not go so far as to check the coverage. This is because of its relatively low footprint in our codebases, the difficulty of measuring coverage for it [[1](https://github.com/alphagov/finder-frontend/pull/2264)], and the fact that we often cover it implicitly with Ruby tests, as part of our UI approach of progressive enhancement. An exception to the need for coverage is [Static](https://github.com/alphagov/static), for which JavaScript constitutes 70% of the codebase.

I'll then adjust the criteria accordingly. How does that sound? Have I captured the points you made OK?

> - We will not check coverage of periphery code e.g. CSS, JavaScript. This is because it has a low footprint in our codebases, and it's hard to measure coverage for: the frameworks we use don't support it.

Author: (It would also be helpful to have a reference to any guidance we have on progressive enhancement.)

> - We will not check coverage of periphery code e.g. CSS, JavaScript. This is because it has a low footprint in our codebases, and it's hard to measure coverage for: the frameworks we use don't support it.

Reviewer 3: Service Manual – [Building a resilient frontend using progressive enhancement](Building a resilient frontend using progressive enhancement
). We also have it in the [GDS Way](https://gds-way.cloudapps.digital/manuals/programming-languages/html.html#content).

> - We will not check coverage of periphery code e.g. CSS, JavaScript. This is because it has a low footprint in our codebases, and it's hard to measure coverage for: the frameworks we use don't support it.

Reviewer 3: The proposed phrasing sounds excellent, Ben. Happy to approve this PR, but not sure if that has any weight to be honest.

> - We will not check coverage of periphery code e.g. CSS, JavaScript. This is because it has a low footprint in our codebases, and it's hard to measure coverage for: the frameworks we use don't support it.

Author: Hopefully it will get through! I'll invite people to approve after Senior Tech have (they make the ultimate decision on these things).

I've added a commit to put this into the main text: https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-rfcs/pull/128/commits/3469831899f39d23de30195e111b44ffdf5e5563

I'll resolve this thread, but feel free to comment if you think there's more to discuss.

An app has "enough" of these tests when:

> - Its code coverage exceeds 95% at the point when CD is enabled.

Reviewer 4: One thing that is commonly missed in tests is the actual rendering of the page. The default behaviour in RSpec controller tests for example is not to render the page; it is something that can be [enabled](https://relishapp.com/rspec/rspec-rails/docs/controller-specs/render-views).

As an example, most of the tests of flows in Smart Answers do not render the page. Most of the ruby code is tested, but a miss-configuration in an erb file that would cause a page not to load (misspelled method name for example) may not cause tests to fail.

Therefore, I think it is good to ensure at least once for a page, to test that it does render. Without this an application can have 100% coverage but be unable to render a page!

Author: Thanks @reggieb for raising this - I had no idea this was a problem. It turns out this behaviour is unique to Smart Answers: most of our apps have [feature tests](https://github.com/alphagov/content-publisher/tree/master/spec/features) that _do_ render pages and check what's on them.

Since this appears to be a special case, I don't think we need general criteria around it. However, it is alarming that a large portion of the Smart Answers codebase may not be tested. I'm not very familiar with Smart Answers, though.

@theseanything could you help out here? I'd like to understand how much of a problem this is: the spirit of the criteria around coverage is that _most_ of the code in a repo should be covered to enable CD (or leave it enabled). If there is a significant gap in testing, then I think we have to make a special provision for Smart Answers e.g.

- Disable CD while we investigate how we can significantly improve the test coverage for ERB files; or

- Leave CD enabled and document this as an accepted risk (will require input from @bevanloon or @richardTowers).

I think we have the good track record of having CD for Smart Answers on our side, so there's that in favour of leaving things as they are. To be clear: I don't think we should leave CD enabled if we think there is a big gap in testing, as then there is no motivation for us to follow through on fixing that after the RFC concludes.

Reviewer 5: Yup - lack of full integration tests for each smart answer flow (e.g. headless browser completing a flow) is a definite gap in our testing.

Whilst we should have them, I don't think there has been _any significant increase_ in risk of issues making it to production since enabling CD for smart answers.  

If we were to disable CD: 
- It’s still unfeasible to manually check every flow and every possibility. So changes to the core of smart answers (which can effect any flow) carry the same risk of issues making it to production. I.e. we had no way to prevent this before.

- For changes to individual flows our process involves the use of preview apps. Or the draft stack for new flows. The equivalent of checking a flow in integration - and no significant change in risk. 

I can’t see disabling CD reducing this risk and I can’t see why enabling CD should be motivation to get this work done. We should have other ways to prioritise this work (tech debt board?) that aren’t steps backwards - as either way we won't be improving what we really care about (i.e. risk of issues making it production.) Our team is currently investigating whether we can add these missing tests.

Author: Thanks for your thoughts @theseanything. 

I don't really want to turn CD off either, especially as Smart Answers seems to be a great example of a whole team adopting it responsibly - with a healthy mixture of manual and automated testing. 

I should still emphasise that enabling CD for Smart Answers was only ever a _trial_. All trials come to an end, and we always said they were just a stepping stone towards an RFC, where we thoroughly consider which apps should have it. An app being in the trial shouldn't mean it gets certified as safe, without further thought.

However, that doesn't mean we can't have special cases, and turning CD off doesn't have to be the outcome. In this case, I think you're saying we should leave it as-is because:

- We're aware of the problem and we have a process in place to manage the risk.
- The risk is unchanged with/out CD, due to the complexity of the code under test.
- Your team is also investigating how we can further improve the situation with tests.

That's good enough for me.

@reggieb does that address your concern?

Reviewer 4: I'm happy with that.

My comment was more to raise awareness that getting 100% coverage did not mean that you had a guarantee that everything was tested. In my experience, not testing pages actually render is common and an excellent example of a condition where coverage (as determined by the likes of *rcov*) could be 100% but still leave large sections of code and functionality untested.

I used Smart Answers as an example, as it's the app I'm currently working on and one where the lack of page rendering in tests has caught me out.

> 

Reviewer 2: Is there some rationale for the 95 number? A quick (potentially flawed) search of your file seemed to indicate we have ~50% of apps that don't meet this number. Which would indicate that we've got a bunch of fixing to do to meet this standard, whereas ~80% meet a 90% standard. Given coverage is quite a blunt number I was wondering whether we had evidence to suggest the apps under the threshold were under-tested.

It does seem prudent to have something that indicates a level of quality even it is arbitrary and it doesn't seem an easy task so big kudos for the thinking and research behind it.

Anecdotally I was surprised how bad Content Store fared (68%) given its simplicity. Looking at the coverage it seems to be all to non-application code, which - although good to clean up - seems to have limited impact on the difference between it being automatically and manually deployed. So I wondered if the 95% might sign people up to a bunch of clean-up that doesn't affect much app code.

Author: The number is indeed, arbitrary. I chose 95% because most of our repos are very near to meeting it, but not quite. I think this is important: we should have something to motivate us to look at the tests we have already, and think about whether any are missing. In my exploration of this among our apps, I've found:

- Some with unused code. This is low effort to delete, so not a good reason to lower the threshold.
- Lots with untested rake tasks. These can be ignored, which is a caveat I make [later on](https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-rfcs/blob/continuous-deployment/rfc-128-continuous-deployment.md#automatic-deployments).

I wouldn't expect work to improve coverage to take more than a day, for most apps. Apart from requiring less effort, do you see any advantage in lowering the threshold to accommodate more apps?

Reviewer 2: Sure, I get you. So there is an aspect of motivation in a number that is slightly out of reach to encourage a review of most test suites before enabling CD. That seems reasonable.

As discussed in the meeting today it'd be good to capture the spirit of what the 95% means, which I guess is thorough unit tests and integration tests of functionality that exercise code within and outside of the coverage (HTML, JS)

Author: Sure, thanks for reminding me. I've revised the first bullet point around the reasoning for this check in https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-rfcs/pull/128/commits/ee95fef20edb6d395a19545daeeab3c0508adfa4.

A previous draft of this RFC would have required a detailed audit of the functionality of each app, to ensure we had Smoke or sandboxed E2E tests for each of its features, for some definition of "feature".

This approach was rejected because:

- There is no clear way to demarcate features of an app, let alone GOV.UK as a whole. Given the sheer volume of functionality in our apps, it's not practical to audit or have realistic tests for all of it.

- While we have existing tests for specific features of GOV.UK [[1](https://github.com/alphagov/publishing-e2e-tests/tree/b4a7961cdcd200623a694baf833724a41c98d051/spec/collections_publisher)] [[2](https://github.com/alphagov/smokey/blob/a60df2cde5c886fa6d54e8cd820d90facca89e8e/features/csv_preview.feature)], there is no thorough, positive logic to justify their existence or extension [[1](https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-rfcs/blob/master/rfc-050-do-end-to-end-testing-of-gov-uk-applications.md#solution)] [[2](https://github.com/alphagov/publishing-e2e-tests/blob/f12ce7a9626b38728758cf157ea883907bd89de2/docs/what-belongs-in-these-tests.md)]. This is a weak foundation to try and build upon.

## Consequences

> 

Reviewer 4: I think one aspect not covered in this RFC and that I think should be a consequence of continuous deployment, is that best practice needs to be for Pull Requests to be small. Large PRs which make multiple changes, are the most likely to cause problems, and the most difficult to rollback or fix. In general, a large number of PRs is better than a few large PRs. Small PR tend to be the least risky to merge (or where risks exist they tend to be better understood) and thereby mitigate some of the risks added by moving to continuous deployment.

Author: +1 to that.

I do think it's slightly out-of-scope for this RFC to try and mandate how people write their PRs. For one thing, it's difficult to measure "size", and there can be reasonable exceptions to a rule.

I could still mention this as part of [being more cautious](https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-rfcs/blob/continuous-deployment/rfc-128-continuous-deployment.md#being-more-cautious). So we not only need to rethink our muscle memory for clicking merge, but also how we got there in the first place, if you follow me.

How does that sound?

Reviewer 6: We do have some [styleguides around pull requests](https://github.com/alphagov/styleguides/blob/master/pull-requests.md), although this is probably superseded by the [GDS Way](https://gds-way.cloudapps.digital/standards/pull-requests.html#pull-requests). Perhaps the GDS way is a good place to think about calling out small changes.

Author: I'm going to resolve this thread for now. @reggieb feel free to reopen if you have more thoughts about how our PR practices should feature in this RFC.

Reviewer 4: :+1:

> **Quote from the trial of CD**: "We'll have to up our game to check things before deploying them. There are always corner cases you don't expect. We're perfectly capable of checking all our changes."

### Automatic deployments

We will enable automatic deployments for the apps listed [here](https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-puppet/blob/c24ff191ce7fc8a38ceb464f0139faba04b9734b/hieradata_aws/common.yaml#L145), but only when they meet the safety criteria of this RFC. To help with this, a rough audit of "compatibility" can be found in [Appendix A: Compatibility](rfc-128/compatibility.md).

- We can immediately enable automatic deployments for apps marked with a ✅.
- We will undertake work to address all the issues (⚠) for apps marked with a ❌.

> **We will disable CD for Publishing API**. This was only enabled on a trial basis, and requires non-trivial work to bring it up to the new standard. We should avoid setting a false precedent by leaving CD enabled.

> The following steps must be taken as part of enabling automatic deployments:

Author: I agree we do need more testing and better tools than we have now. 

On the subject of better tooling, I see that as out-of-scope for this RFC: improving the tooling around our Smoke tests should happen naturally if we start to use them more e.g. [here](https://github.com/alphagov/smokey/pull/693).

Flakiness is also reduced in the current CD implementation: we only run the tests that are relevant to an app, so most of the time we're not hindered by flakiness due to the volume of tests, or unrelated apps.

I'd like your help with unpacking the last part, though: how many Smoke tests do we need before we can turn on CD for an app? Originally I thought it would be [a lot](file:///Users/benthorner/govuk/govuk-rfcs/rfc-128-continuous-deployment.md#check-detailed-features-of-govuk-work), but the more I thought about it, the more I convinced myself that the checks [outlined above](file:///Users/benthorner/govuk/govuk-rfcs/rfc-128-continuous-deployment.md#safety-concerns) are enough to give us a manageable level of risk.

Perhaps I'm overthinking your suggestion, though: maybe I just need to really emphasise that all the stated criteria must be met, (which includes at least one new Smokey test for most apps)?

> The following steps must be taken as part of enabling automatic deployments:

Reviewer 7: > better tooling, I see that as out-of-scope

I agree 👍 

> the checks outlined above are enough to give us a manageable level of risk

I think we should verify a newly deployed app is not just running, but healthy, in a production environment.

Perhaps the line "Check: Smoke tests pass (i.e. the app runs in a production environment)", could be changed to "Check: Health checks pass (i.e. the app is healthy in a production environment)". Does you think that makes sense?

Rather than specifically "smoke tests" I mean "a signal that would tell us if a newly deployed app is healthy", so we can rollback and halt a release.

This signal could be any/all of a Prometheus alert, an app healthcheck endpoint, smoke tests, or something else, provided that this signal can effectively replace an 'eyeball' test for an app.

If we already had that deploy signal, and good rollback behaviour, perhaps we could enable CD today.

> how many Smoke tests do we need before we can turn on CD for an app? 

Fewer smoke tests would be better.

Our current deploy guidance instructs developers to check application metrics in Grafana. The only health signal on app dashboards is usually the 5xx rate and the processes count. We could automate checking an app's 5xx rate (and other relevant metrics) in staging/integration before a release is promoted.

Perhaps we could remove/reduce the smoke tests, if the healthchecks/alerts are sufficient. What do you think?

  - Comment on how the app meets the criteria of this RFC.

> **We can be flexible with coverage**. We can defer adding internal repo tests if the code has no impact on the running app e.g. rake tasks [[1](https://github.com/alphagov/email-alert-api/blob/59fc71a58317ef2998f2c0ef102020da3ca9df96/lib/tasks/support.rake)]. But we should not defer removing any unused code.

### Slack notifications

We need to ensure we are notified about a failure in the automation, so that the automation is no worse than the current, manual process. This has already been done for the `Deploy_App_Downstream` job [[1](https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-puppet/pull/10532)] [[2](https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-puppet/pull/10601)].

So that we cover the entire deployment pipeline, we will also update [the `Deploy_App` job](https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-puppet/blob/f57335f6027487b5b2d2205a35ceb411776f09ce/modules/govuk_jenkins/templates/jobs/deploy_app.yaml.erb) to post a Slack message in the #govuk-developers Slack channel, whenever it fails due to an unexpected error.

### Delete [publishing-e2e-tests](https://github.com/alphagov/publishing-e2e-tests)

> These sandboxed E2E tests are only run for the apps affected by this RFC, but do not form part of the new safety criteria for automatically deploying them. In other words, they become superfluous, yet their maintenance cost is very high. They can be safely deleted once automatic deployments are enabled for [all of the supported apps](https://github.com/alphagov/publishing-e2e-tests/blob/8412c23c5907a41a3d8b2c9dcd52d4905b139e32/docker-compose.yml).

Reviewer 7: Forgive my ignorance, am I right in thinking e2e tests are the only thing that actually test async behaviour across services (aside from production users)? E.g. the new workers are working correctly, I can still publish something, editions still get pulled off a queue and indexed in search.

If that is the case, I wonder if you've already considered how we will test async behaviour without e2e tests?

Author: Yes, that's right. Originally the E2E tests were going to feature significantly as part of the safety criteria for enabling CD - that's what [this section](file:///Users/benthorner/govuk/govuk-rfcs/rfc-128-continuous-deployment.md#check-interactions-between-apps-work) is about.

For the reasons in that section, I eventually rejected this approach because:

- No one seems to like our E2E tests, for quite fundamental reasons, so we're unlikely to get very far if we mandate writing a load more of them (no one _wants_ to do that).

- With a bit more thought, I struggle to think of any scenarios that are covered by the E2E tests that aren't (or can't be) covered by [the safety criteria described above](https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-rfcs/blob/continuous-deployment/rfc-128-continuous-deployment.md#safety-concerns).

One thing to really emphasise from that section is that the E2E tests are really artificial: the environment we're running them in has nothing to do with our real environments, which means we get little additional reassurance from them over thorough testing within each app, and contracts for the API interactions between them.

So I think the answer to your last question is: we already do (in part), and the safety criteria in this RFC will start to make that much more comprehensive than it is now (or may ever be if we rely on E2E tests).

This [blog](https://technology.blog.gov.uk/2019/01/29/lessons-learnt-using-contract-testing-in-gov-uk-pay/) is a bit downplayed in the text, but the outcome is basically the same.

Reviewer 7: Thank you, I appreciate you've considered this! Let's delete them.

> **It is still possible to deploy an app manually.** The new pipeline is just an automation of the manual deployment steps. Rollback is unchanged, and freezing deployments is supported [[1](https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-puppet/blob/c24ff191ce7fc8a38ceb464f0139faba04b9734b/modules/govuk_jenkins/templates/jobs/deploy_app_downstream.yaml.erb#L22)].

We will continue to use the new development and deployment pipeline created for the trials. Much of the functionality is defined in [a new `Deploy_App_Downstream` Jenkins job](https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-puppet/blob/c24ff191ce7fc8a38ceb464f0139faba04b9734b/modules/govuk_jenkins/templates/jobs/deploy_app_downstream.yaml.erb), which works like this:

1. **Integration**

   1. Deployment runs.
   1. [**new**] Wait for the Smoke tests for the app to pass [[1](https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-puppet/pull/10387)].
   1. [**new**] Remotely trigger the same deployment in Staging.

1. **Staging**

   1. [**new**] Repeat as for Integration, but to Production.

> We propose to apply this automation across our apps. Given the scale of the change, we need to think carefully about how we can make it consistently safe and secure, before we enable CD for an app.

Author: Yes, I think so. RFCs don't tend to have an expiry or "big change" caveats on them, so I would expect this and all previous RFCs to continue to apply to GOV.UK, irrespective of the platform it runs on.

Fortunately, this RFC contains very little that's specific to the current platform. And we can always agree collectively to amend it or supersede it so it continues to make sense into the future.

@bilbof @sengi does that sound reasonable to you? I'm very much seeing this as something that can support our replatforming effort - assuming one of the goals is to be CD-enabled.

> We propose to apply this automation across our apps. Given the scale of the change, we need to think carefully about how we can make it consistently safe and secure, before we enable CD for an app.

Reviewer 7: @benthorner yes, I agree this should apply to the new platform, too. We'll raise a superseding RFC if we must stray far from this one.

- We will not check coverage of periphery code e.g. CSS, JavaScript. This is because it has a low footprint in our codebases, and it's hard to measure coverage for: the frameworks we use don't support it.

An app has "enough" of these tests when:

- Its code coverage exceeds 95% at the point when CD is enabled.

#### Check: API [contract tests](https://docs.publishing.service.gov.uk/manual/pact-broker.html) pass (i.e. adapters work with their APIs)

For the purpose of automating deployments:

- We only need to add contract tests when it's hard to be confident about an API change. If an API endpoint only has a single "consumer" app, then it's easy to gain confidence by manually testing the pair still work together.

- We only need to add contract tests for the APIs we consume internally. Some of our APIs may be public, but this is a separate, product-level commitment. Our strategy for testing public APIs is out-of-scope for this RFC.

With this in mind, an API app has "enough" of these tests when:

> - Each endpoint with multiple consumers has at least one contract test.

Author: There a few apps with APIs that only have a single consumer (that [I can find](https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-rfcs/blob/continuous-deployment/rfc-128/e2e-interactions.md)):

- Collections
- Content Data API
- Imminence
- Maslow
- Router API
- Support
- Support API

Part of the motivation behind the "rule of 2" is that I didn't want to prematurely harden our APIs with contract tests. For me, the existence of a contract test should be the indicator that an API is stable and open for reuse, and I'd be suspicious of using an API otherwise. I think this applies well to Support*, Router and Content Data APIs, which are primarily a way of splitting code between two repos, rather than a general facility for any GOV.UK app to make reliable use of.

I don't think we should bother doing anything for Maslow.

However, the Imminence and Collections APIs are harder to justify, because it's not immediately apparent what consumers they have, and the general nature of their APIs means they _could_ have more consumers in future. I can't think of a simple rule that would include these. However, would could agree they are a special case and _must_ have contracts tests as a criteria for enabling CD. How does that sound?

- @sihugh and @thomasleese can you comment on these apps, since you've worked on them? Are we significantly concerned about automating deployments for them without contract tests? Is it worth the effort?

> - Each endpoint with multiple consumers has at least one contract test.

Reviewer 8: I'm not very familiar with Imminence, but a few of our apps do use the APIs provided by Collections ([Signon](https://github.com/alphagov/signon/blob/9aa4910b518ea22f9e190ab50fec138108c0de63/lib/organisations_fetcher.rb#L24), [Transition](https://github.com/alphagov/transition/blob/9d44d66b5a157b5089c53395ac74dab3ce2c96bc/lib/transition/import/whitehall_orgs.rb#L51-L52)) so I would expect that we'll need contract tests for them. I don't see that as a special case, because clearly here the API has multiple consumers.

I'm sure we'll miss some APIs that have multiple consumers that we're not aware of, but I think we can deal with that as and when it comes up, and add contract tests when we learn about it.

> - Each endpoint with multiple consumers has at least one contract test.

Author: Thanks @thomasleese, that's really helpful. With Collections, I did notice those API calls when I did my audit; neither of them are from live code, though, so they didn't contribute towards the total count.

However, it sounds like we have some consensus that Collections should be a special case and contract tests will be a requirement for enabling CD for it. @thomasleese @sihugh @bevanloon do you all agree?

@sihugh did you have an opinion on Imminence? I'm not fussed either way, it's just that we need to make a choice of how much effort we're committing to for each app, if we consider it to be a special case.

> - Each endpoint with multiple consumers has at least one contract test.

Reviewer 2: > Part of the motivation behind the "rule of 2" is that I didn't want to prematurely harden our APIs with contract tests. For me, the existence of a contract test should be the indicator that an API is stable and open for reuse, and I'd be suspicious of using an API otherwise. I think this applies well to Support*, Router and Content Data APIs, which are primarily a way of splitting code between two repos, rather than a general facility for any GOV.UK app to make reliable use of.

Perhaps that hardening would be a de-motivating aspect to creating new distributed apps 😁  A lot of the smells in our architecture seem to be cases where only one app speaks to another. 

> - Support
> - Support API

These are both apps that act as APIs? 😬 

--- 

I wonder if this is an aspect of legacy and future maybe. I can definitely understand the pragmatism of not wanting to do contract tests for all APIs but then if I was making something new it'd feel weird to not consider whether to add contract tests until I had a certain number of consumers. Perhaps there's a middle ground all new APIs should have them?

> - Each endpoint with multiple consumers has at least one contract test.

Author: Hmm, it does seem quite a difficult one to argue for. I think it's reasonable for people to want to split large masses of functionality somewhere, and there are benefits to having such a distinct interface boundaries (forward planning, clear abstraction). However, if we look at what we've actually got:

- Support/API makes no sense to me, architecturally.
- Router/API also makes no sense to me (with it's weird "reload" feature).
- Maslow is not worth commenting on.
- Collections is a good example of a need for contract tests.
- Imminence also seems worthy of some contract tests.
- Content Data API is a less clear example.

Looking at it that way, I think there's a good case for future apps having contract tests, as half the apps we proposing as exempt are verging on nonsensical, architecturally.

@theseanything as someone who helped created one of the most recent APIs for GOV.UK, what are your thoughts on having contract tests for new apps - should they be required?

> - Each endpoint with multiple consumers has at least one contract test.

Reviewer 5: Yup - so for Content Data API, contract testing wasn't seen as a feasible testing strategy. At the time, the long term plan for Content Data API was that anyone/thing could use the API (i.e. consumers we weren't responsible for the development of), not just the frontend application. [Here's a good list of conditions when contract testing doesn't work](https://docs.pact.io/getting_started/what_is_pact_good_for). 

I don't think there should be a concrete requirement for contract testing on every app (old or new) as its not suitable for every application.

Sorry its not very helpful - but I'm not sure what blanket rules we can put in place to cover all our APIs for adequate testing. Maybe there are other testing strategies that sufficient? I.e. Making sure we have feature/integrations tests that cover all endpoints and responses. 

(Also a little unclear what we mean by "hardening an API"?)

---

#### Bonus context (- not necessarily relevant for this RFC)
Our alternative approach (for some of the better architected endpoints), we made an effort to document the API and add feature tests (request specs) for guarantees we made in the [documentation](https://github.com/alphagov/content-data-api/tree/master/doc/api). We also (partly, but not very well) versioned our API and served multiple versions. This meant that we could decouple the API from the frontend application - i.e. if we changed the API, the change was documented, versioned and made live, but we didn't have to force the frontend into using it straight away nor did we break existing functionality as it just requested the older compatible version of the API. This worked pretty well for us!

> - Each endpoint with multiple consumers has at least one contract test.

Author: Thanks both 🚀. I've added another commit - https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-rfcs/pull/128/commits/ac9814b0febf5f8d120bbb38fbc0eed7c8cbc4f9 - and will resolve this now.

- We need to test that an app can connect to any systems it uses for data storage and retrieval, such as a database. This usually has production-specific config [[1](https://github.com/alphagov/email-alert-api/blob/1b5f59f3927637afb0c790702f8f0050788edc9d/config/database.yml#L22)] [[2](https://github.com/alphagov/content-store/blob/f4b61d4f2756341b6418085d878ec83b09d70e9c/config/mongoid.yml#L23)] [[3](https://github.com/alphagov/content-publisher/blob/944fe51b4cb8205348e155b965b8bad57adcf4fe/config/storage.yml#L5)], which could be faulty.

- We do not need to test connectivity to other GOV.UK apps, since this should be handled by [our internal API adapters](https://github.com/alphagov/gds-api-adapters/blob/1ceba690edb37295257328d953874224833fcd5e/lib/gds_api.rb) with no configuration inside the repo. An exception to this is [authentication with Signon](https://github.com/alphagov/email-alert-api/blob/1b5f59f3927637afb0c790702f8f0050788edc9d/config/initializers/gds_sso.rb).

With this in mind, an app has "enough" of these tests when:

- It has a test that checks for a successful response to an arbitrary request.

> - It has a test that checks for a successful login with Signon (if applicable).

Author: Thanks for the chat about this. I originally intended this to be another Smokey test, but you rightly pointed out just how many extra environment variable this would require us to bestow on that repo - one for each token.

The healthcheck suggestion is interesting. While I agree an app is very broken if its SSO config is broken, doing that check as part of the `/healthcheck` endpoint is oddly separate to the other proposed here.

Thinking about it some more, I actually think we can avoid all Signon checks, by simply removing the code we're concerned about from the repos. I've got a PR to do that [here](https://github.com/alphagov/gds-sso/pull/241), could you take a look?

> - It has a test that checks for a successful login with Signon (if applicable).

Reviewer 2: Yup, that sounds a good idea. I've dropped a review there. Nice one.

> - It has a test that checks for a successful login with Signon (if applicable).

Author: Thanks! We've started rolling out this change, so I think it's safe to remove it as a criterion: https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-rfcs/pull/128/commits/0784737b001085dd5d0ec3536cc88bf37adc57b3.

- It has a test that checks for connectivity to any read/write dependencies:

  - Databases e.g. MongoDB, Postgres, MySQL, Redis
  - Queueing systems e.g. RabbitMQ
  - File systems e.g. AWS S3
  - Caching systems e.g. Memcached

> > Example: [Travel Advice Publisher](https://github.com/alphagov/travel-advice-publisher) has enough of these tests because it has one to check login with Signon [[1](https://github.com/alphagov/smokey/blob/a60df2cde5c886fa6d54e8cd820d90facca89e8e/features/publishing_tools.feature#L106)] and another to check its `/healthcheck` endpoint for connectivity to Redis and MongoDB [[1](https://github.com/alphagov/smokey/blob/a60df2cde5c886fa6d54e8cd820d90facca89e8e/features/travel_advice_publisher.feature)] [[2](https://github.com/alphagov/travel-advice-publisher/pull/979)].

Author: I'll just respond to the networking issue first: I don't think that will be a big issue, since the monitoring machine Smokey currently runs on has pretty broad access (for Icinga) to all of our machines.

Local network tests [aren't new with CD](https://github.com/alphagov/smokey/blob/160fbe09541ed5d1d0acbdf44355ec5d454c0dc1/features/mirror.feature). However, I agree it's not ideal to run healthcheck tests as part of [the Smokey loop](https://docs.publishing.service.gov.uk/manual/alerts/smokey-loop-tests.html), when they were only added for the other, manual use case for Smokey. 

(For anyone else reading: we can't easily check Icinga's healthcheck alerts, since they're per-machine and the checks are asynchronous, so we'd have to wait a while to be sure they'd refreshed.)

With [the recent work to restart our apps reliably](https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-puppet/pull/10761), it would be much easier to introduce a healthcheck on the end of the existing "Deploy_App" job. On balance, I don't think it does much harm to have healthcheck tests in Smokey, but it would be much more DRY if the "Deploy_App" job could do them itself. For the sake of unblocking CD, I'd like to continue as-is, but add a new consequence to see if we can do better than what currently exists:

### Healthy deployments

The original implementation of the CD pipeline resulted in [a new set of `/healthcheck` tests in Smokey](https://github.com/alphagov/smokey/pull/731), in addition to checking them with an Icinga alert on each machine. It's still impractical to use Icinga as part of the CD pipeline: the alerts are checked asynchronously and the names are unstable. Some duplication is therefore inevitable.

An alternative to individual Smokey tests is to make calling the `/healthcheck` endpoint part of the "Deploy_App" job, such that it would fail if the healthcheck fails. We will investigate this approach as a way to DRY up the Smokey tests, in parallel with enabling automatic deployments for our apps.

> > Example: [Travel Advice Publisher](https://github.com/alphagov/travel-advice-publisher) has enough of these tests because it has one to check login with Signon [[1](https://github.com/alphagov/smokey/blob/a60df2cde5c886fa6d54e8cd820d90facca89e8e/features/publishing_tools.feature#L106)] and another to check its `/healthcheck` endpoint for connectivity to Redis and MongoDB [[1](https://github.com/alphagov/smokey/blob/a60df2cde5c886fa6d54e8cd820d90facca89e8e/features/travel_advice_publisher.feature)] [[2](https://github.com/alphagov/travel-advice-publisher/pull/979)].

Reviewer 2: Sure, that sounds quite reasonable. I didn't realise about the mirror tests (there's always one small inconsistency from the past that ends up breeding in the future)

It might well be that the need for the healthcheck Smokey is rendered moot by replatforming - as it would seem a future deployment approach should consider an application healthy (via the healthcheck) before switching requests to it.

> > **Services are special.** We cannot make a request to a service, as it has no web interface. Instead, we will need infer the service is running indirectly, using metrics sent to Graphite in response to [a regular heartbeat](https://github.com/alphagov/publishing-api/blob/a4a054b768b7c98fcd1448f74fe6e975ab69bb2f/config/schedule.rb#L10).

Author: I agree the proposal isn't ideal, not least because it requires waiting an arbitrary amount of time for new metric datapoints that prove the service is up. In addition, the RabbitMQ check is [no longer required](https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-rfcs/pull/128/commits/e81017e306ec7b8cd1e2eb04280525093b9c0a6f), so we learn relatively little by doing an intrusive check, over the test/production variability of a Rails app. Given this new disadvantage, the suggested approach seems to add little value over a synchronous check. How about this:

> **Services are special.** We cannot make a request to a service, as it has no web interface. Instead, we will update [the deployment script for each service app](https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-app-deployment/blob/efc730f0f101b2e457abc48cbab67982728a8c93/email-alert-service/config/deploy.rb) to check the process is running after the app is restarted.

> > **Services are special.** We cannot make a request to a service, as it has no web interface. Instead, we will need infer the service is running indirectly, using metrics sent to Graphite in response to [a regular heartbeat](https://github.com/alphagov/publishing-api/blob/a4a054b768b7c98fcd1448f74fe6e975ab69bb2f/config/schedule.rb#L10).

Reviewer 2: Yes, I'm much happier with that. Thanks.

> > **Services are special.** We cannot make a request to a service, as it has no web interface. Instead, we will need infer the service is running indirectly, using metrics sent to Graphite in response to [a regular heartbeat](https://github.com/alphagov/publishing-api/blob/a4a054b768b7c98fcd1448f74fe6e975ab69bb2f/config/schedule.rb#L10).

Author: Updated 👍

As well as restricting who can merge, we also had to address a vulnerability with Integration Jenkins: someone without production access could manually trigger the CD pipeline by running the [`Deploy_App_Downstream` Jenkins job](https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-puppet/blob/c24ff191ce7fc8a38ceb464f0139faba04b9734b/modules/govuk_jenkins/templates/jobs/deploy_app_downstream.yaml.erb). In order to prevent this kind of unauthorised deployment, the job has additional checks:

- The tag to deploy must be the highest `release_123`-type tag.
- The tagged commit must match the latest commit on the master branch.

> Note that someone without production access could still subvert this protection, by manually altering the job definition. In this scenario, we would permit an unauthorised deployment to the Staging environment, but no further: only people with production access can access Staging Jenkins [[1](https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-developer-docs/blame/736a167bf93b7338347c73cacbddfbdc68e72733/source/manual/rules-for-getting-production-access.html.md#L18-L19)], which also does the above checks.

Author: Yes, that's right. It's a compromise, really, since that version of the pipeline would be more complex e.g.

1. "Pre_Deploy_App" job to do the check, calls "Deploy_App".
2. "Deploy_App" is unchanged (to allow for branch deploys, etc.).
3. "Deploy_App_Downstream" calls "Pre_Deploy_App" in the next environment.

While it's not ideal, I do think the current pipeline strikes a good balance between security and simplicity, since the worst case scenario is (a) highly unlikely; and (b) low impact (it's not production).

I'd like to suggest we leave it as-is, in the knowledge that our replatforming will do away with all the funky Jenkins jobs in general - this is perhaps another reason to keep them simple.

Would that be OK?

> Note that someone without production access could still subvert this protection, by manually altering the job definition. In this scenario, we would permit an unauthorised deployment to the Staging environment, but no further: only people with production access can access Staging Jenkins [[1](https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-developer-docs/blame/736a167bf93b7338347c73cacbddfbdc68e72733/source/manual/rules-for-getting-production-access.html.md#L18-L19)], which also does the above checks.

Reviewer 2: Yeah, seems a reasonable trade-off given current climate and inform replatforming we'd hope the new infrastructure can resolve this risk (and, at the least, not make it riskier without consideration)

> Note that someone without production access could still subvert this protection, by manually altering the job definition. In this scenario, we would permit an unauthorised deployment to the Staging environment, but no further: only people with production access can access Staging Jenkins [[1](https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-developer-docs/blame/736a167bf93b7338347c73cacbddfbdc68e72733/source/manual/rules-for-getting-production-access.html.md#L18-L19)], which also does the above checks.

Author: Sure, I'll resolve this now.

cc @bilbof @sengi, although I'm sure you're already aware of this.

## Consequences

### Being more cautious

We will no longer have the safety blanket of our changes languishing in Integration or Staging. It may take some time for us to get used to this new way of working e.g. by gradually doing more [branch deployments](https://docs.publishing.service.gov.uk/manual/development-pipeline.html#review-your-own-changes).

> **Quote from the trial of CD**: "We'll have to up our game to check things before deploying them. There are always corner cases you don't expect. We're perfectly capable of checking all our changes."

### Automatic deployments

We will enable automatic deployments for the apps listed [here](https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-puppet/blob/c24ff191ce7fc8a38ceb464f0139faba04b9734b/hieradata_aws/common.yaml#L145), but only when they meet the safety criteria of this RFC. To help with this, a rough audit of "compatibility" can be found in [Appendix A: Compatibility](rfc-128/compatibility.md).

- We can immediately enable automatic deployments for apps marked with a ✅.
- We will undertake work to address all the issues (⚠) for apps marked with a ❌.

> > **We will disable CD for Publishing API**. This was only enabled on a trial basis, and requires non-trivial work to bring it up to the new standard. We should avoid setting a false precedent by leaving CD enabled.

Author: I'm hoping this will be something everyone on GOV.UK will feel motivated to help with. Some apps may lag behind, especially if they're not worked on and have lots of issues against the criteria.

For me, the really important thing is that we have a practical framework (this RFC) that we can follow to enable automatic deploys for an app. If we have that, we can enable apps at our own pace.

The challenge is how we compromise safety with practicality. I think the balance here about right: many of the apps should only require low effort (~1 day) to enable, so within the realm of possibility.

Short answer: I don't know, I hope we will, but we'll make progress nonetheless.

Does that answer your question?

> > **We will disable CD for Publishing API**. This was only enabled on a trial basis, and requires non-trivial work to bring it up to the new standard. We should avoid setting a false precedent by leaving CD enabled.

Reviewer 2: Yup, thank you. Should this be accepted it sounds like it'd be good to have a chat with Senior Tech to see if they're willing to help co-ordinate designating some of the work load across the platform (similar to the exercise we did for dependabot distribution last year but without the lasting commitment)

> > **We will disable CD for Publishing API**. This was only enabled on a trial basis, and requires non-trivial work to bring it up to the new standard. We should avoid setting a false precedent by leaving CD enabled.

Author: Yes, I agree as well. I have some ideas for an initial rollout:

- Enable all the apps that satisfy the criteria (easy).
- Enable all the apps that are just missing healthchecks (medium).
- Enable all the apps that prevent us deleting the E2E tests (hard).

That leaves a tail of stuff requiring a range of effort to enable. I think that would be a great start, and we can revisit these plans if the RFC is accepted. For now, I'm going to resolve.

cc @bevanloon @richardTowers so you have some awareness.

The following steps must be taken as part of enabling automatic deployments:

- Restrict merge access to "GOV.UK Production" [[example](https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-saas-config/pull/55)].

> - Tag [relevant Smoke tests](https://github.com/alphagov/smokey/blob/5dc36fc78c12838ec1c8070d6fbc535ae5433b89/docs/writing-tests.md#filtering-by-app) to run for the app [[example](https://github.com/alphagov/smokey/pull/708/commits/91a5ce94b7b96d09f5db87e63fbc3e400788de00)].

Author: I've also found the arbitrary organisation of Smokey quite irritating - it's hard to find some things. We can apply as many tags to a scenario as we like, so the organisation doesn't really hinder us.

Since this RFC makes relatively low usage of the Smokey tests, I do think it's out-of-scope to improve them. However, I do think we should make it clear what they are for. How about this:

### Check: App is running (i.e. `/healthcheck` returns 200 OK`)

(replaces existing section about Smokey)

### Check: Smoke tests pass (i.e. double check features work)

For the purpose of automating deployments:

- We do not strictly need to run any Smoke tests, as the combination of the other checks described here covers basically all the scenarios in which an app could break, due to a change in its repository.
- We should still check that existing Smoke tests for an app pass, as while they aren't strictly necessary, they act as a "backup" or "secondary" layer of testing for features that we have deemed to be critical.

... (consequences)

### Clarify Smokey

We will add documentation to [smokey](https://github.com/alphagov/smokey) to clarify how the tests it contains represent features that we have deemed to be critical to GOV.UK, and exist:

- For the purpose of testing changes to infrastructure.
- As a "backup" layer of testing for changes to individual apps.

> - Tag [relevant Smoke tests](https://github.com/alphagov/smokey/blob/5dc36fc78c12838ec1c8070d6fbc535ae5433b89/docs/writing-tests.md#filtering-by-app) to run for the app [[example](https://github.com/alphagov/smokey/pull/708/commits/91a5ce94b7b96d09f5db87e63fbc3e400788de00)].

Reviewer 2: Yes. I like that suggestion, thanks

> - Tag [relevant Smoke tests](https://github.com/alphagov/smokey/blob/5dc36fc78c12838ec1c8070d6fbc535ae5433b89/docs/writing-tests.md#filtering-by-app) to run for the app [[example](https://github.com/alphagov/smokey/pull/708/commits/91a5ce94b7b96d09f5db87e63fbc3e400788de00)].

Author: Cool, I've added a commit for that 👍.

- Add a note in the [Release](https://github.com/alphagov/release) app to warn about the change.

- Add a PR template to warn about the change [[example](https://github.com/alphagov/smart-answers/blob/3509ba3e68c62a206874c96111628dd65adae689/.github/pull_request_template.md)].

  - Backfill the PR template as a comment on existing PRs.

- Enable automatic deployments in a Puppet PR [[example](https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-puppet/pull/10590)].

  - Comment on how the app meets the criteria of this RFC.

> **We can be flexible with coverage**. We can defer adding internal repo tests if the code has no impact on the running app e.g. rake tasks [[1](https://github.com/alphagov/email-alert-api/blob/59fc71a58317ef2998f2c0ef102020da3ca9df96/lib/tasks/support.rake)]. But we should not defer removing any unused code.

### Slack notifications

We need to ensure we are notified about a failure in the automation, so that the automation is no worse than the current, manual process. This has already been done for the `Deploy_App_Downstream` job [[1](https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-puppet/pull/10532)] [[2](https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-puppet/pull/10601)].

> So that we cover the entire deployment pipeline, we will also update [the `Deploy_App` job](https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-puppet/blob/f57335f6027487b5b2d2205a35ceb411776f09ce/modules/govuk_jenkins/templates/jobs/deploy_app.yaml.erb) to post a Slack message in the #govuk-developers Slack channel, whenever it fails due to an unexpected error.

Author: The main reason for #govuk-developers was for consistency with the existing notification we have in place for "Deploy_App_Downstream". I'm not clear myself on why we need [the existing notification](https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-puppet/pull/10532):

- Either we don't really care when the deployment goes out (we have the badger for that); or
- Or we do care and we will probably want to monitor it in the release app anyway.

It would require some effort to make the existing notifications more personalised, since we'd have to manually look up which PR the deployment came from, and do our own Slack integration to notify the author.

I'm growing to dislike my suggestion, because it will likely give a load of false alarms since it's common for people to manually invoke the "Deploy_App" job, and we'll get notified about e.g. typos in parameters.

On balance, I think the notifications now we have in place are sufficient, and we can always reconsider adding more if we find that deploys are silently failing and this is leading to problems as-yet unknown.

How about that?

> So that we cover the entire deployment pipeline, we will also update [the `Deploy_App` job](https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-puppet/blob/f57335f6027487b5b2d2205a35ceb411776f09ce/modules/govuk_jenkins/templates/jobs/deploy_app.yaml.erb) to post a Slack message in the #govuk-developers Slack channel, whenever it fails due to an unexpected error.

Reviewer 2: Yup, that sounds good. I hadn't appreciated that "Deploy_App" would notify #govuk-developers too and I agree with removing that.

I'm not convinced #govuk-developers is the right channel for "Deploy_App_Downstream" but since it is already there it can probably be iterated at a later date if it probes problematic.

> So that we cover the entire deployment pipeline, we will also update [the `Deploy_App` job](https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-puppet/blob/f57335f6027487b5b2d2205a35ceb411776f09ce/modules/govuk_jenkins/templates/jobs/deploy_app.yaml.erb) to post a Slack message in the #govuk-developers Slack channel, whenever it fails due to an unexpected error.

Author: Agreed, and removed 👍

> ### Delete [publishing-e2e-tests](https://github.com/alphagov/publishing-e2e-tests)

Reviewer 7: We plan to use Dockerfiles in app projects, but we'll need to modify them. It's OK with me if you would like to delete the Dockerfiles, we'll bring them back when we need them.

> ### Delete [publishing-e2e-tests](https://github.com/alphagov/publishing-e2e-tests)

Reviewer 2: Ok great - that sounds good @bilbof. It seems like it would be more prudent to delete them until they become used. We can always put together a quick gist or dev docs document with links to everything before deletion for reference so the work doesn't have to be repeated whilst avoiding the risks of keeping files/resources that aren't used for anything.

> ### Delete [publishing-e2e-tests](https://github.com/alphagov/publishing-e2e-tests)

Author: Thanks @bilbof and @kevindew! I'd like to make this clear in the consequence, by editing to: "They, along with all of their associated infrastructure [[1](https://github.com/alphagov/email-alert-api/blob/0b87e62288ddb1653451f84e1f36e17ce4e8e9dc/Dockerfile)] [[2](https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-app-deployment/blob/58fcfab4262da0ba06a568dd5e9bbd76be2f4f62/lib/docker_tag_pusher.rb)], can be safely...".

Is that OK?

> ### Delete [publishing-e2e-tests](https://github.com/alphagov/publishing-e2e-tests)

Reviewer 9: Does anyone use these tests locally for testing anything, or is there more of a reliance on making branch deploys to integration to check everything works (i.e. smoke tests pass) because of the hassle of getting these E2E tests running locally?

> ### Delete [publishing-e2e-tests](https://github.com/alphagov/publishing-e2e-tests)

Author: Yes, definitely the latter: the E2E tests take _absolutely ages_ to spin up locally. I've never heard of anyone spinning them up locally, except to debug a problem with the tests themselves.

Although it's not equivalent, GOV.UK Docker does provide some support for manual testing of apps working together, with a much lower barrier to entry.

> ### Delete [publishing-e2e-tests](https://github.com/alphagov/publishing-e2e-tests)

Reviewer 2: Yes, removing all infrastructure sounds good.

> ### Delete [publishing-e2e-tests](https://github.com/alphagov/publishing-e2e-tests)

Author: OK. I've added a commit for this.

@karlbaker02 I'm going to assume I've answered your question and resolve this. Feel free to comment back if you think there's still more to discuss.

# Continuous Deployment

## Summary

In [RFC 70](https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-rfcs/blob/master/rfc-070-path-towards-continuous-deployment-cd.md#proposal) we committed to fully automatic deployments. The following provides a framework for how we will actually achieve this for all of our existing apps.

Decision: in order to safely enable automatic deployments for each app, we will specify minimum criteria that must first be met. See the criteria described [below](#safety-concerns).

An audit of our apps against these criteria can be found in [Appendix A: Compatibility](rfc-128/compatibility.md).

> ## Problem

Reviewer 10: Having attended your talk, I now have a much clearer understanding of the intent behind the RFC. I do think it's worth clarifying the _Problem_ section in light of what you said in the talk, as I got a very different impression as to the goals of the RFC from reading this section than I did from the talk.

My understanding from the talk is that the problem is to determine a set of minimum criteria for enabling CD for an app such that we can be reasonably confident that enabling CD won't significantly increase the rate of defects which reach production. This is currently mentioned briefly in the summary section above, but it wasn't at all clear to me that that's the whole purpose of the RFC.

My understanding from reading this Problem section was much more vague - it seemed to be partly setting out a case for why we want continuous deployment (which, as you mentioned in the talk, has already been covered elsewhere) and partly saying that GOV.UK has problems with testing (which is true and relevant but if I understood you correctly in the talk, the test engineering problems aren't really what you're trying to solve here - it's just that the current lack of testing makes it more challenging to say what a reasonable minimum standard should be without creating unrealistic hurdles to enabling CD).

I'd recommend basically replacing this section with a problem statement about determining those minimum criteria (basically a more in-depth version of the above in your own words - assuming I've not misinterpreted you). I think most of what's currently in this section is either unrelated or only peripherally related to the problem which you're setting out to solve here.

Author: Thanks for taking the time to get all this down. It makes a lot of sense, and you're not the only person who seems to be confused about the purpose of this RFC. I'm open to making changes here.

I've found the existence of RFC 70 rather awkward. It barely justifies why CD is the way to go, and goes into even less detail about how we'd actually get there. I decided to basically ignore it when writing this one.

Part of the original goal for this RFC was to act as a writeup for the trials we've been doing on CD over the past few months. I've filled in a lot of the holes left behind by RFC 70: the formal justification, the mechanism, the security restrictions. While the safety criteria are the key difference between the trials and the change proposed here, I still think we should document the overall CD approach as a clear decision (that's not in a Google Doc).

I'm not sure where to go here, as I see pros/cons either way. One simple thing that might help: what did you think the purpose of the RFC was originally? What impact did that have on your reading of it?

> as I got a very different impression as to the goals of the RFC from reading this section than I did from the talk

I may not have helped by deliberately down-playing the rest of the RFC. I only did this, though, because I knew most of the people present had been involved with the trials and previous discussions of CD.

Reviewer 10: Ah I see - if the remit of this RFC _does_ include making the case for CD then I'd recommend organising those "why CD" arguments under a section heading so that's it's clear to the reader and dealt with separately from the "where do we set the bar for testing before CDing an app" discussion.

Author: I'm thinking about what this change might look like - ideally, something simple. How about this (outline):

## Problem

Our current approach to deployment has multiple issues with it:

### 1. We have a constant backlog of deployments
**[move existing problem intro here]**

### 2. We do not have a working definition of "OK"
**[append the following]**

While we often rely on automated tests to tell us when something is broken, it's unclear whether this is justified: there is no minimum standard for testing of GOV.UK apps.

### 3. We freely merge PRs with breaking changes

## Proposal

The obvious solution to the first issue is to make deployments automatic for the apps listed [here](https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-puppet/blob/c24ff191ce7fc8a38ceb464f0139faba04b9734b/hieradata_aws/common.yaml#L145). This has already begun, as part of [a trial of Continuous Deployment](https://docs.google.com/document/d/18y2fLzqbHyTliThxuiyxKznDw4TZmPiQZAk-3rkgpBg/edit) and [a subsequent extension to include 5 more apps](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1YhgjJjDRB57-IlgPNAAZzFTI3jIUucGJKokti_lQiRQ/edit).

> **It is still possible to deploy an app manually.** The new pipeline is just an automation of the manual deployment steps. Rollback is unchanged, and freezing deployments is supported [[1](https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-puppet/blob/c24ff191ce7fc8a38ceb464f0139faba04b9734b/modules/govuk_jenkins/templates/jobs/deploy_app_downstream.yaml.erb#L22)].

However, we have been unable to make further progress due to the other two issues: we are concerned that enabling automatic deployments en masse would lead to an increase in defects reaching production.

In order to proceed, we need to agree a clear and actionable set of criteria for enabling automatic deployments, so that we will only do so when we can show this is safe, as well as secure.

### Security checks

### Safety checks

Reviewer 10: Cool - yes I think that's much clearer. Thanks!

Author: Great! I've put this in a new commit (with a few extra edits): https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-rfcs/pull/128/commits/a593468a87998575690dfb06ff61ee827c6c890f.

Feel free to comment after reading, if you think there's more to discuss.

Merging a PR for an application repo [results in a new "release" tag](https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-jenkinslib/blob/30e9392d31b98e5c251ea471d793761748eea1e8/vars/govuk.groovy#L123). We have a [Release](https://github.com/alphagov/release) app to monitor these. Every new release tag [is automatically deployed to our Integration environment](https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-jenkinslib/blob/30e9392d31b98e5c251ea471d793761748eea1e8/vars/govuk.groovy#L134).

This is where the automation ends. In order for a release (or series of releases) to be deployed to the GOV.UK Production environment, a developer with [production access](https://docs.publishing.service.gov.uk/manual/rules-for-getting-production-access.html) must:

- Manually check the release is "OK" in Integration.
- Manually deploy the release to Staging.
- Manually check the release is "OK" in Staging.
- Manually deploy the release to Production.

> Having these manual steps has lead to a number of problems.

Reviewer 9: I think one we haven't mentioned here which it's worth mentioning is that by enabling CD and having everything deployed automatically, we actually release the value of the work when it's ready; there's no point having lots of PRs merged and sitting in the main branch but not released - which delivers zero value to our users.

Author: That's a good point. I don't think I can clearly articulate it as a problem, though, as it's hard to measure how much it's true: are users suffering from the delay? Since a lot of our undeployed PRs are mostly technical changes, it's not clear that they are - we tend to deploy "real" changes with more gusto, because we actually care about them.

I think you make a similar point in https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-rfcs/pull/128#discussion_r510939633 around knowing about bugs sooner. I'd like to focus on that, as it's definitely an omission, and there's a definite loss/gain there.

Is that OK?

Author: I think I've addressed this in https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-rfcs/pull/128/commits/cecb8f96e6797d6321563f687881459951b4dea5.

> ### We freely merge PRs with breaking changes

Reviewer 2: Although your logic sounds accurate @sengi I think the deployment related problem of "we merge breaking changes" is that we've not fully established that merging means that the code is safe to deploy. This is due to expectations that any problems with the merge would be caught either during testing as part of a manual deploy or by manual testing on integration post merge.

> ### We freely merge PRs with breaking changes

Reviewer 10: I agree that's an important issue. I think it needs to be made clearer as to whether it's in or out of scope of the RFC though.

> ### We freely merge PRs with breaking changes

Author: This is an interesting discussion. I've always thought of "enabling CD" as being synonymous with "enabling CD safely". I don't think it's possible to have a discussion about RFC and not consider safety. 

We can break "safety" down into:

- Poor testing i.e. a poor definition of "OK". This is addressed in the section dedicated to safety criteria i.e. we _will_ be increasing our automated coverage and reducing our reliance on manual testing.

- Unsafe habits (other than poor testing 😆) i.e. freely merging stuff that breaks. The only decision we're making here is whether to enable CD. In the "being more cautious" consequence, I'm trying to argue that we will naturally address this problem - we can't force good habits on people, but we can make bad habits less appealing!

Of the two, I think the latter is the one that could be seen as out-of-scope. However, I really do believe that enabling CD will help alter these habits (and has already), and I'm open to other ideas to push that.

Thanks for the very clear suggestion, by the way! I'm open to changing things. How about we have a chat about this? (Long textual discussion can get a bit demoralising after a while.)

> ### We freely merge PRs with breaking changes

Reviewer 10: No worries - more than happy to have a quick chat instead, might be easier. I went and muddied the waters by bringing the scope question into it. My original point was meant to be about document structure and clarity rather than scope.

> ### We freely merge PRs with breaking changes

Author: Me and @sengi have discussed this and agreed it's superseded by the discussion we're having on https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-rfcs/pull/128#discussion_r510868062.

   1. [**new**] Remotely trigger the same deployment in Staging.

1. **Staging**

   1. [**new**] Repeat as for Integration, but to Production.

We propose to apply this automation across our apps. Given the scale of the change, we need to think carefully about how we can make it consistently safe and secure, before we enable CD for an app.

### Safety concerns

The person who merges a PR must be confident that it is safe to do so. As part of the trial of CD, [we added PR templates to each affected app](https://github.com/alphagov/smart-answers/pull/4758), to explicitly warn developers about the automatic deployment.

However, we also want to ensure that a faulty PR merged in haste can be caught before it impacts the live site. There are a number of checks we can perform to help ensure this, without aiming for perfection.

> **We won't check alerts.** At the time of writing, we have no evidence that checking Icinga alerts has any advantage over the checks discussed below. We can investigate such a check if we find evidence [[1](https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-puppet/pull/10597)].

> > **We will only consider _live_ code.** Interactions due to manual and scheduled tasks can be checked manually, using a branch deployment. In the worst case, we should have ample time to fix any faults that develop.

Author: Haha, yes "live" means "can be triggered at any time" - something like a "live wire". Do you think that needs clarifying?

One thing I've struggled on with this RFC is to contain the scope of these safety requirements: they should be just enough for us to switch from manual to automatic. This naturally excludes most rake tasks, because the risk to our users of them being broken is unchanged. So, while I definitely think we should test most of our rake tasks, so they work when they're needed, I'm seeing it as out-of-scope for the RFC.

Scheduled tasks are similar, if a little harder to argue for: the nature of them means it's unlikely we're currently doing any kind of manual testing with them (i.e. waiting for them to run), so again switching from manual to automatic should have little practical effect on the quality of them code that's shipped to production. I've managed to reassure myself that: anything on a schedule can always be done "later".

Does that make sense? Do you think others would benefit from this reasoning in the main text?

> > **We will only consider _live_ code.** Interactions due to manual and scheduled tasks can be checked manually, using a branch deployment. In the worst case, we should have ample time to fix any faults that develop.

Author: Hmm...not sure I follow.

I think we both agree that the focus on "live" code is justified, because it's the body of code that will be most affected by enabling CD. We want to make sure the defect rate is the same or lower for this code.

For scheduled and manual tasks, we don't expect CD to change how many defects make it to production. We should obviously have tests for these things, but it's hard to argue for here, and it presents a greater barrier to entry.

> On the other hand, that same argument could apply equally to any functionality that we're not yet testing.

This is the bit I'm not sure about. 

More generally, do you think there's anything that should change in the main text?

> > **We will only consider _live_ code.** Interactions due to manual and scheduled tasks can be checked manually, using a branch deployment. In the worst case, we should have ample time to fix any faults that develop.

Reviewer 10: I'd suggest:

`**We will not require additional tests for batch and scheduled tasks** Where we currently test these manually, we will continue to do so. We do not expect continuous deployment to lead to any increase in defects reaching production for these jobs.`

(This avoids the ambiguity about "live code" and the questionable claim about worst-case bugs in batch jobs.)

> > **We will only consider _live_ code.** Interactions due to manual and scheduled tasks can be checked manually, using a branch deployment. In the worst case, we should have ample time to fix any faults that develop.

Author: Thanks! I've reworded that slightly in https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-rfcs/pull/128/commits/2e5a53e42c7bccc679cc9577eea6bf60834aaaf2 - I think we may as well avoid any reference to how this code may (or may not) be tested, since it's out-of-scope. I'll resolve this, but do comment if you think there's more to discuss.

> 

Reviewer 9: I have a few questions which I'm unsure of where they might fit into the rest of this RFC, so I'll put them here under safety concerns:

- I feel that there is some general consensus that releasing changes late in the week (think an hour or so before the end of the working week) is something that we generally put off until we're back for the next week, unless the change is urgent. Given that it's going to be much easier to press the merge button on a PR without necessarily thinking about this implication, we should perhaps remind folk of this once we switch on CD to more repos. I'm not sure if/how much of a problem this might have been for the repos with CD switched on already, if at all, but I think it's worth calling out.
- second, are there any concerns specifically around Dependabot PRs? We have a tendency at present to merge Dependabot PRs without checking a) what's changed in the gem that is being bumped and b) whether this actually works (whether by checking out the branch or even perhaps by looking at integration dashboards). Given that Dependabot PRs have caused some issues in the past (_I don't have links to problem commits but can dig some out_), is there anything else you feel we need to do to ensure Dependabot PRs are good-to-go?

Reviewer 8: > Second, are there any concerns specifically around Dependabot PRs? We have a tendency at present to merge Dependabot PRs without checking a) what's changed in the gem that is being bumped and b) whether this actually works (whether by checking out the branch or even perhaps by looking at integration dashboards). Given that Dependabot PRs have caused some issues in the past (I don't have links to problem commits but can dig some out), is there anything else you feel we need to do to ensure Dependabot PRs are good-to-go?

I think we should try to avoid treating Dependabot PRs as any differently to others. If a Dependabot PR caused an issue with the deployment, then it sounds like we're missing some safety checks in our app/deployment process rather than there being an issue with the PR itself. I suspect that the volume of Dependabot PRs in the past has sometimes led to poor practices (deploying without checking the dashboards as you mention) but I think this RFC would actually help in that respect by mandating the safety checks.

Reviewer 9: Thanks Tom, that sounds reasonable (and I'm definitely not wanting to revisit the previous RFC around Dependabot in my comments here) 👍

Author: Thanks for the comments @karlbaker02 and @thomasleese for giving your thoughts. Let's see if we can address them here, or if it would be easier to have a separate discussion:

> it's going to be much easier to press the merge button on a PR without necessarily thinking about this implication

I think you're saying that it's much easier to deploy a breaking change (the button itself should be no more stiff than it is now 😉). This is mentioned later in a consequence: being more cautious. If we're merging stuff late on a Friday now that contains bugs, that blocks any emergency deploys over the weekend. We should stop doing that. I can expand on the consequence and call out this habit as well. Would that address your concern?

> Second, are there any concerns specifically around Dependabot PRs?

I am worried about how I (and others) treat our libraries. @thomasleese is right that there is an issue with how we review Dependabot PRs. Our discussion today focussed on GOV.UK Publishing Components as an example of where we have freely merged Dependabot PRs with breaking changes. I'll recap a few points from that:

- @injms is very keen that we invest in visual regression testing, which makes a lot of sense for this gem. However, the risk for each app is mostly unchanged between manual vs. automatic deployments: if we're not checking the PR manually now, then we will still not be checking the PR manually with CD.

- Although we don't re-test the functionality of the library (that would not be very DRY), the feature tests in our apps do provide some level of reassurance about the functionality. For example, the "button" component must at least render a button, even if it's colour makes it invisible (or something else whacky!)

- Merging a Dependabot PR should really be seen as a failsafe or 2nd chance to halt buggy code in our libraries. In general, we should not be releasing new versions of our libraries without doing some kind of testing with the apps that use them. Once we do a release, it's fair game for someone to assume it will work.

- Our Smoke tests can act as the final "backup" layer for testing that we miss elsewhere. They are far from complete, but they should reassure us that functionality we deem to be critical continues to work.

Despite all that, this RFC does make it more likely that certain kinds of buggy library code will get shipped to production, by reducing the delay between the shipment of the buggy version and its deployment in apps that use it. We must accept that if we want to continue, and I think there's no one way to fix it. However, I think it's worth at least calling it out as a consequence, with some of the above caveats.

How does that sound?

Reviewer 9: Thanks for the explanations Ben, this all sounds good. With the deploying late on a Friday, I was going more along the lines of there being less people around to support if something does goes wrong rather than saying it's going to be easier to deploy a breaking change; deploying a breaking change is probably going to be equivalent between the manual process we have now and any automated CD process.

For the second point about Dependabot PRs, I agree with both yours and Toms comments. One silver lining is that we'll hopefully know sooner if something is an issue through virtue of it getting deployed soon after it's merged, rather than sitting around unreleased, meaning whoever merged should still be around and have context to figure out the best solution.

Author: Thanks @karlbaker02! I've done some thinking and have rewritten the consequence around "being more cautious" here: https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-rfcs/pull/128/commits/cecb8f96e6797d6321563f687881459951b4dea5. I'm going to resolve this now, but feel free to comment again if you think there's something still to discuss.

#### Check: Internal repo tests pass (i.e. features are tested in detail)

For the purpose of automating deployments:

- We will use code coverage as our indicator of previous, thorough testing. While an app may have a [rigorous testing strategy](https://github.com/alphagov/content-publisher/blob/69bed3535de1e65bda9d5909a3bc56a319e46576/docs/testing-strategy.md), it's hard to know if this has been applied consistently as the app has evolved.

> - We will require a minimum level of coverage that is realistic for all of our apps. We will not pursue this once CD is enabled, as doing so could encourage [a lack of rigour in the way we write our tests](https://jeroenmols.com/blog/2017/11/28/coveragproblem/).

Author: Oops! That link was originally meant to elaborate on < 100% coverage. You're right it's contradictory here.

I did originally see ongoing coverage out-of-scope for this RFC, because the main goal is to make a one-time "switch to automatic". However, an idea that's surfaced since then is to turn the safety checks proposed here into a minimum ongoing testing standard for GOV.UK. This is better than nothing (as is surfacing coverage stats on GitHub), although still a long way from a practical commitment to better testing.

So, I propose that we drop this point and replace it with (roughly) the following consequence:

### Better testing

In order to meet the safety criteria in this RFC, we will need to improve the tests we have around many of our apps. Once we have enabled automatic deployments, there is a risk the tests will degrade over time.

To help prevent this, we will write new a new manual in GOV.UK Developer Docs, which will specify the safety criteria in this RFC as the new minimum level of testing for GOV.UK apps. This means that, in addition to meeting these criteria for the purpose of enabling automatic deployments, we will commit to upholding them on an ongoing basis. It is out-of-scope for this RFC to resolve how we will uphold this commitment once we have made it.

> - We will require a minimum level of coverage that is realistic for all of our apps. We will not pursue this once CD is enabled, as doing so could encourage [a lack of rigour in the way we write our tests](https://jeroenmols.com/blog/2017/11/28/coveragproblem/).

Author: I've added a new commit for this: https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-rfcs/pull/128/commits/922261ea3ab198739dc002c5c79e2bae72d1ef6b.

#### Check: Smoke tests pass (i.e. the app runs in a production environment)

For the purpose of automating deployments:

- We need to test that an app can respond to a request for each of the machine classes it runs on [[1](https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-app-deployment/blob/d4bb62aa79face46d2e164e316f38f7a64a1b8be/content-store/config/deploy.rb#L3)] [[2](https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-app-deployment/blob/d4bb62aa79face46d2e164e316f38f7a64a1b8be/whitehall/config/deploy.rb#L13)]. This is purely to prove that an instance of the app is running [[1](https://github.com/alphagov/email-alert-api/pull/1346)], and may be covered by other tests.

- We need to test that an app can connect to any systems it uses for data storage and retrieval, such as a database. This usually has production-specific config [[1](https://github.com/alphagov/email-alert-api/blob/1b5f59f3927637afb0c790702f8f0050788edc9d/config/database.yml#L22)] [[2](https://github.com/alphagov/content-store/blob/f4b61d4f2756341b6418085d878ec83b09d70e9c/config/mongoid.yml#L23)] [[3](https://github.com/alphagov/content-publisher/blob/944fe51b4cb8205348e155b965b8bad57adcf4fe/config/storage.yml#L5)], which could be faulty.

> - We do not need to test connectivity to other GOV.UK apps, since this should be handled by [our internal API adapters](https://github.com/alphagov/gds-api-adapters/blob/1ceba690edb37295257328d953874224833fcd5e/lib/gds_api.rb) with no configuration inside the repo. An exception to this is [authentication with Signon](https://github.com/alphagov/email-alert-api/blob/1b5f59f3927637afb0c790702f8f0050788edc9d/config/initializers/gds_sso.rb).

Reviewer 10: What are the testing requirements for important libraries such as gds-api-adapters? Would we catch, say for example, a bug which caused wrong URLs to be generated for certain API endpoints under certain conditions?

Author: For gds-api-adapters, this should be covered by the previous section: we will require a minimum level of testing for this library, since the way the code in it behaves is one of the main differences between test and production for apps that use the adapters (which is basically all of them!).

For other libraries, we have no additional test requirements. This is because the code in our apps that makes use of them doesn't vary between test and production, so nothing changes* between manual vs. automatic deployments for those apps. Definitely part of a broader testing strategy, though.

*An interesting example is [the Slimmer library](https://github.com/alphagov/slimmer/blob/64482b28572a7d038827de214832317e75f0c1ae/lib/slimmer/test.rb), which is the thing we use to shove the GOV.UK header/footer on to pages rendered by our frontend apps (by calling a rendering API). A bug in this library could cause havoc, but it has no code footprint in our apps. So, while the gem itself (still) needs to be really thoroughly tested, it has no code in our apps that could be broken in a PR (that I've been able to find).

Does that address your concern here?

- Enable automatic deployments in a Puppet PR [[example](https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-puppet/pull/10590)].

  - Comment on how the app meets the criteria of this RFC.

> **We can be flexible with coverage**. We can defer adding internal repo tests if the code has no impact on the running app e.g. rake tasks [[1](https://github.com/alphagov/email-alert-api/blob/59fc71a58317ef2998f2c0ef102020da3ca9df96/lib/tasks/support.rake)]. But we should not defer removing any unused code.

### Slack notifications

We need to ensure we are notified about a failure in the automation, so that the automation is no worse than the current, manual process. This has already been done for the `Deploy_App_Downstream` job [[1](https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-puppet/pull/10532)] [[2](https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-puppet/pull/10601)].

So that we cover the entire deployment pipeline, we will also update [the `Deploy_App` job](https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-puppet/blob/f57335f6027487b5b2d2205a35ceb411776f09ce/modules/govuk_jenkins/templates/jobs/deploy_app.yaml.erb) to post a Slack message in the #govuk-developers Slack channel, whenever it fails due to an unexpected error.

> ### Delete [publishing-e2e-tests](https://github.com/alphagov/publishing-e2e-tests)

Reviewer 10: Do the e2e tests provide any feature coverage which doesn't overlap with Smokey?

Reviewer 2: Yes, the e2e tests focus on actions that have side effects - such as altering content. Therefore they're best suited to an isolated environment where flakiness can't be caused by other users (and one of the pain points is the resources needed to build and configure a mini GOV.UK). The Smokey test suite does (nearly) idempotent actions that don't produce noticeable side effects, which make them safe to run against production environment.

A closer comparison to where coverage would be lost would be to compare whether there are things in e2e tests that aren't covered in test suites of individual apps. We'd very much hope that isn't the case as e2e tests weren't intended to be a replacement or alternative to testing in individual apps.

Reviewer 10: I completely agree that system testing (e2e tests) shouldn't be overused and that most tests should be at the bottom of the pyramid (lots of unit tests > some integration tests > few e2e tests).

On the other hand it seems to me entirely unrealistic to imagine that a system of 50+ components doesn't need any system testing at all and can be tested entirely through unit and integration testing. If there are some superfluous tests in the e2e test suite which should be deleted then that's one thing, but to delete the whole lot sounds like it would leave some [serious gaps](https://gfycat.com/happygoluckyseriouschimneyswift).

Author: The question did come up before: should we try to delete the E2E tests in this RFC?

One of the problems I had when writing the safety criteria is: where do the E2E tests fit in? I don't think we should omit them altogether, since they are clearly relevant, at least in name, to the idea of "safety". To avoid leaving them in limbo, I had to consider what value they actually add on top of the tests we have already.

I concluded they add very little, if any, value:

- We've avoided adding new tests to them e.g. notice the absence of Content Publisher.
- We don't seem to be testing key workflows with them e.g. [these tests are oddly specific](https://github.com/alphagov/publishing-e2e-tests/tree/master/spec/collections_publisher).
- They completely omit our email and support systems (nothing about these is tested).
- They have a very high maintenance cost, not least from adding 5+ mins to every PR build.

Really, it comes down to this: we have a poor system for E2E tests that we actively avoid; we're not going to invest in it, and leaving it as-is sets a bad precedent for continuing to avoid E2E tests in future. We've always been scared to delete them in a standalone change (no one seems to know why). The fact that none of them are a safety criteria for CD is possibly the best indicator we'll ever have that they are, in fact, useless.

☝️ Some strong emotions here (I've feel I've wasted precious life on these things). I think it's worth pointing out that I did make a real effort to go [the other way](https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-rfcs/blob/continuous-deployment/rfc-128-continuous-deployment.md#check-detailed-features-of-govuk-work), but I came up blank. Despite all the words, there's a simple way we can make progress: can you (or anyone) point out something critical in the E2E tests that isn't covered by the other tests discussed here? If we can do that, then perhaps there is an argument for keeping them.

Reviewer 9: I haven't had to run the end-to-end tests too much manually during my time on GOV.UK, so there's a risk that I might not be speaking from the voice of experience here, but I broadly agree with @sengi above. There may be tests that aren't in a critical path in the end-to-end tests, which we perhaps don't care about from a CD perspective. On the other hand, there may also be tests in the end-to-end tests which, even if they aren't critical, aren't replicated elsewhere and would form a gap were they to be deleted.

The reasoned approach (in my opinion) would be to go ahead with CD without including the end-to-end tests as part of that, but _not_ deleting them at the same time. Let's minimise the moving parts here.

At the same time, if we strongly feel that the end-to-end tests serve no purpose then let's open an RFC, even if it's purely to re-iterate the comments that have already been made in this RFC.

Author: Thanks for your thoughts @karlbaker02. I've been talking to @sengi about this and both agree that the current argument for deleting the E2E tests here doesn't hold.

However, I still wish to pursue this as part of this RFC, because it's a natural consequence of totally ignoring these tests when considering the safety of the changes we make to our apps. 

I did originally consider a separate RFC, but was put off by previous discussions around this: people really don't like them, but they also seem to be scared of deleting them. This RFC presents a great opportunity, since it brings both of these issues together in a constructive way. Conversely, I can easily imagine an RFC about deleting the end tests going the same way as discussions in the past: "we don't like them, we don't want to delete them, but we don't have time to improve them, either". I feel very strongly that we should do _something_ here.

I've talked to @sengi about a few different options, besides deletion. We eventually agreed it's worthwhile to continue arguing for deletion, but with some different words. @sengi what do you think:

### Delete [publishing-e2e-tests](https://github.com/alphagov/publishing-e2e-tests)

In establishing the safety criteria for automatic deployments, we had to consider these tests. As explained in the rejected approaches, we chose to avoid them entirely. This brings their existence into question.

We believe these tests add little or no value to GOV.UK. They significantly reduce our agility by adding 5+ minutes onto every PR build, to the extent that we sometimes remove them as a required check. They have very significant maintenance issues and only ever break for reasons unrelated to the features they are testing. Despite these signficiant problems, we invest very little effort in improving them, and actively avoid extending them.

We believe what we gain by deleting them far outweighs the high cost of keeping them.

Reviewer 10: Sounds reasonable to me.

Author: 👍 - I've added a commit for this: https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-rfcs/pull/128/commits/6d2dbd30282de9f7b626f15c99425df88ebc83c4

Reviewer 9: Thanks Ben. If you're both happy then that's great, and it makes sense about bringing the issue together with this RFC on CD. Happy to go with consensus 👍

Reviewer 11: I've given this some thought too, and I'm persuaded that removing these tests once we've improved coverage in the other test suites is the right thing to do.

1) This isn't us removing _all_ of our end-to-end tests, as we still have smokey (albeit that smokey doesn't aim to cover state-changing bits of publishing)

2) The publishing-e2e tests always felt like they were running too early in the pipeline (on pull requests). We should have enough confidence from unit / integration / contract testing that a particular change is safe to merge. Perhaps there's a spot for some more end-to-end testing later in the pipeline, but the publishing-e2e test probably aren't the right fit for that job (e.g. they don't run against realistic infrastructure).

I can see the argument that the deletion of these tests should be discussed on a separate RFC - it would have been nice to take the time to quantify exactly how much pain they're causing us at the moment, and compare that to some analysis of how many bugs they catch. But doing that analysis would be a significant amount of work, and I'm pretty confident it wouldn't change our decision. Not worth it. Still, I can't shake the feeling that it's being snuck through as a [Rider](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rider_(legislation)) to get a controversial decision made on the back of an uncontroversial one. If that's deliberate, then congratulations, the strategy has worked on me 😆.

@bevanloon - what do you think?

Author: @richardTowers @bevanloon I've made another adjustment to this section, to help make sure it's achievable in practice: https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-rfcs/pull/128/commits/7d6d8de0c346bec2d05a7d9ca18bccf1d0563aef.

Reviewer 6: I've had a long chat with Richard about this and I'm happy to let the publishing e2e tests go once we've done the work to bring our non-frontend apps up to a continuous deployment state as suggested.

Author: Thanks @bevanloon! And everyone for taking the time to think through the decision - it's by no means any easy call to make. Following our discussion, I've added a commit to adjust the wording here: https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-rfcs/pull/128/commits/3402d4cd32b6e9dd383005292a58414e81c481a9.

I'll resolve this now, but anyone can comment if they think there's more to discuss.

- Manually check the release is "OK" in Integration.
- Manually deploy the release to Staging.
- Manually check the release is "OK" in Staging.
- Manually deploy the release to Production.

Having these tedious, manual steps makes it easy to *not* deploy a change. This is especially true for new joiners, who can only merge PRs and cannot deploy them beyond Integration.

> Full stats and supporting code can be found [here](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1Hw1qE-ozqb7n97-fsWkH8Ddgz-7Jyr2G8z8lHXJZPhE/edit#gid=0). We expect these will improve slightly over the coming months, due to the reduction in changes generated by Dependabot [[1](https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-rfcs/blob/master/rfc-126-custom-configuration-for-dependabot.md)].

![Graph of deploy lag (in days)](rfc-128/chart.svg)

A backlog of deployments also makes diagnostics harder:

- ⚠ We can mistakenly debug an issue against the undeployed version of the code.
- ⚠ We may struggle to isolate a breaking change, if many were deployed together.

### 2. We freely merge PRs with breaking changes

> We tend to merge PRs and only later worry if they break the app. This can cause the codebase to become undeployable, and interrupt other developers testing changes on Integration.

Reviewer 5: I'm finding problem statement is bit vague and difficult to understand.

What I think what you are saying here is: Bugs/issues are merged in to the deployment branch (master/main). These bugs are discovered after commits have been merged, but before they have been deployed to production. This prevents future deployments until bug fixes have also been merged into the deployment branch.

Do we know how we discover bugs after they've been merged? ("only later worry if they break the app"). I assume this when we manually test and run the code the integration environment? (Which gives reason to making sure we don't need to manually test and we write adequate integration tests)

 How does this "interrupt other developers testing changes on Integration"? I thought we are still able to deploy any branch integration.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
### 2. Discovering issues/bugs after merging to the deployment branch

Sometimes we merge commits with issue or bugs into our deployable branch (main/master). These issues are sometimes only discovered after the commits has been merged, but before they have been deployed to production. This prevents any future deployments to production until a fix has been merged into the deployment branch.  This can cause delays in deployment of other code changes for example new features or other bug fixes. 
```

Wasn't too sure what was meant by "interrupt other developers testing changes on Integration"?

Author: Thanks for the suggestion - very helpful 💯. I think it's quite different from what I'm trying to say, though. I'll try and talk around it, which might help: we will always find bugs after we merge changes; the problem is that we currently put too little effort into finding them _before_ we merge i.e. we click "merge" without thinking (much).

This is kind of separate to the problem of adequate testing, which we should try to be objective about if possible. What I'm trying to get across here is the other side of testing: the human intelligence we _can't_ be objective about, where we think deeply about the change we're making and any subtle, hard to test ways it might break something. At the moment, I think we freely merge our PRs without applying much intelligence at the point we click the button.

It might help to point out the parts of the main text that address this:

> The person who merges a PR must be confident that it is safe to do so.

> We are ultimately responsible for our changes, and will need to adapt to this new "CD" way of working by ...

I think we've seen already how using CD has prompted us to be more cautious i.e. apply our intelligence before we click merge, instead of after. So, conceptually the current text feels OK to me, but perhaps the wording could do a better job of explaining the problem (like you say in your comment).

First thing to check: does what I've said make sense?

Reviewer 5: Thanks Ben! From what you’ve said the problem is that : 

> we currently put too little effort into finding them [issues] before we merge i.e. we click "merge" without thinking (much).

and that leads to:  

> Causes the codebase to be un-deployable and interrupt developers testing changes in Integration.

  the latter which I’m understanding to be ultimately one of the problems we are trying to solve with CD.  

What could make this section clearer - is describing what actually causes a codebase to be undeployable? and why does this interrupt developer testing on Integration?   I think my suggestion was trying to explain how the codebase becomes "undeployable" at a higher level. I.e. it only becomes undeployable because we become aware of an issue after merging but before production. 

I'd like to argue that we should make this problem statement higher level because:

- It makes it easier to understand the problem we are solving i.e. its hard to see why "Freely merging PRs" is a problem vs having a "undeployable" codebase.
- Makes it easier to reason a solution - if a un-deployable codebase is because we've merged a bug, but not yet gone live - what do currently do to catch these issues after merging? and can we move them to before we merge?
- "Freely merging PRs" isn't the sole factor to the underlying problem. Inadequate automated testing and manually testing after merging are probably also contributing factors. 

Let me know if I’ve got the wrong end of the stick!

Author: Hmm...this is a tricky one. I was struggling to understand the request you're making. I think it's because there are a couple of ways we can cut the problems we have in these sections:

1. In terms of the types of testing we do (including manual testing).
2. In terms of our attitude towards (a) merging and (b) deploying.

I think you're focussing on (1) and I'm focussing on (2). Both cover the same things, really:

- Our attitude towards merging affects how much testing we do before this point. This can be manual or automatic, and they are both motivated by how we perceive the risk of clicking "merge".

- Our attitude towards deploying affects the post-merge checks we do. Some tests are easier to run at this point, but before we deploy to production. These can be manual or automatic as well.

If we cut with (1), then these sections would be something like "we don't know if we have enough tests" and "our manual tests are too inconsistent to codify". However, I find the people angle easier to write about.

How about this?

### We seldom verify our changes before merging

We tend to merge PRs and only later worry if they break the app. This will range from a feature that no longer works as expected, to the app not running at all. Once a breaking change is merged, we cannot deploy any newer changes without including the broken one. Anyone trying to use the app for testing may also be unable to do so.

Although we have ways to verify a change before we merge it - branch deployments and more internal repo tests - we often rely on our manual deployment process as the "great opportunity" to find bugs. This is unlikely to be as rigorous: the time gap between writing code and deploying the change means we lose context of how to test it.

[append rest of section]

Reviewer 5: Yup - thats fine!

Nit: Maybe have "We sometimes verify our changes after merging” as the title - i.e. drop "seldom". It comes across as a bit of negative generalisation "all developers rarely check their changes before merging".

Author: Thanks @theseanything! I'm wondering what to do now. I could make another PR to amend the section. An alternative would be to leave this comment unresolved, so it can still be found easily. I don't mind.

With "seldom" vs. "sometimes", it is the negative I'm aiming for. Perhaps a more accurate phrase would be "We avoid verifying our changes before we merge". I think that's a better match for what follows.

What do you think?

Example: https://github.com/alphagov/email-alert-api/commit/8e633fc7d89d7f13bc0e5bdcab14ed3dea968289#diff-c1fd91cb1911a0512578b99f657554526f3e1421decdb9e908712beab57e10f9R20

Fix: https://github.com/alphagov/email-alert-api/pull/1346

I couldn't find a good example of myself doing this, but I've definitely done it too. We will never write unbreakable code, yet we have too little caution around merging our changes.

### 3. We do not have a working definition of "OK"

It's easy for each developer to have their own standards, and rely on their own judgement when they check that a change is safe to deploy. Theoretically, we assume a developer will:

- Check the results of [the smoke tests](https://deploy.integration.publishing.service.gov.uk/job/Smokey/).
- Look for any Icinga alerts related to the app.
- Check the [deployment dashboard for the app](https://docs.publishing.service.gov.uk/manual/deployment-dashboards.html).
- Generally make sure the change is tested.

> We often defer to automated tests to tell us when something is broken, but it's unclear whether this is really justified: there is no minimum standard for testing of GOV.UK apps.

Reviewer 5: I don't think we've adequately described why this a problem. Does this mean we rely on subjective measures of quality or code reliability, hence we don't objectively know if code changes are causing more issues for users in production?

Author: Sure, I can explain: aside from the checks listed above, we're supposed to be confident about deploying our changes because our automated tests are passing. But this could be false reassurance if the tests that are passing aren't adequate e.g. if we didn't bother to test something at all (not unheard of). So it's unclear if our deference to PR checks being green is really justified, particularly where we're changing existing code (where we may assume there are also existing tests).

Code coverage is still subjective, in that it's just one way of measuring thoroughness in testing, and the threshold I'm suggesting is also subjective (albeit thoughtfully considered).

So, I'm not sure if there's anything missing here conceptually, but perhaps we can clarify the statement. What do you think?

Reviewer 5: Actually on re-reading this I feel like what we've got there is okay!

Author: Thanks, that's OK! I'll resolve this thread now.

As well as restricting who can merge, we also had to address a vulnerability with Integration Jenkins: someone without production access could manually trigger the CD pipeline by running the [`Deploy_App_Downstream` Jenkins job](https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-puppet/blob/c24ff191ce7fc8a38ceb464f0139faba04b9734b/modules/govuk_jenkins/templates/jobs/deploy_app_downstream.yaml.erb). In order to prevent this kind of unauthorised deployment, the job has additional checks:

- The tag to deploy must be the highest `release_123`-type tag.

> - The tagged commit must match the latest commit on the master branch.

Reviewer 5: I'm a little unclear how this prevents an unauthorised deployments? Someone "unauthorised" could deploy the latest release? Is there still a risk that someone unauthorised could "flood" our deployment pipeline with a deployments?

Author: Good spot! 

I think this is a risk we will have to accept. Our security practices are just flawed: someone with malicious intent could use Integration in various ways to fool us into deploying dodgy code. This is another way, and we need to work with what we've got to restrict the attack surface - our Replatforming should do a far better job of this than we can with our current setup, where people have general SSH access to the whole Integration environment.

It's tempting to think about further restrictions. For example, we could try to detect if a release is already in production, but I don't think there's a secure way of doing that, and there are legitimate reasons for wanting to redeploy an existing release (albeit maybe not with the Deploy_App_Downstream job). One possible mitigation would be to throttle non-manual builds of Deploy_App in production to e.g. 10 an hour.

Otherwise, perhaps we should just call this out as a risk. How about this?

----

Someone without production access could still abuse the pipeline:

- By manually altering the job definition. In this scenario, we would permit an unauthorised deployment to the Staging environment, but no further: only people with production access can access Staging Jenkins [[1](https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-developer-docs/blame/736a167bf93b7338347c73cacbddfbdc68e72733/source/manual/rules-for-getting-production-access.html.md#L18-L19)], which also does the above checks.

- By repeatedly invoking the Deploy_App_Downstream job with the latest release, flooding the production environment with deployments. In this scenario, we would see a chain of [graceful restarts](https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-puppet/pull/10761), along with some loss of worker capacity.

Reviewer 5: Yup - I agree there are bigger security holes and we should just call it out.

I'd be happy with calling it out as a risk like you said, except I'd rephrase it as these checks themselves don't prevented "unauthorised" deployments, they just mitigate against potentially malicious deployments that aren't the latest release.

I've added a suggestion below.

Author: Thanks! I've responded to your suggestion: https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-rfcs/pull/128#discussion_r514275852.

Continuing the discussion here, I think it's worth thinking a little about anything we could do to mitigate the risk you identified. My only suggestion so far is to apply some throttling to deployments in production, which seems like a fairly safe thing to do; it doesn't prevent abuse, but it limits the damage.

Do you have any suggestions?

Author: I've added [a work item](https://trello.com/c/cwsh79vA/200-rollout-of-continuous-deployment) to continue investigating this as part of the rollout of CD.

I'll resolve this now, although feel free to reopen if you'd like to continue discussion here.

However, we have been unable to make further progress due to the other two issues: we are concerned that enabling automatic deployments en masse would lead to an increase in defects reaching production.

In order to proceed, we need to agree a clear and actionable set of criteria for enabling automatic deployments, so that we will only do so when we can show this is safe, as well as secure.

### Security checks

We need to ensure that only people with [production access](https://docs.publishing.service.gov.uk/manual/rules-for-getting-production-access.html) are able to deploy code to the live site. This is equivalent to being a member of the "GOV.UK Production" GitHub team. As part of the trial of CD, we restricted merge access on the affected repos to people in this team [[1](https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-saas-config/pull/49)] [[2](https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-saas-config/pull/51)] [[3](https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-saas-config/pull/55)]. We will [continue to use this approach](https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-saas-config/pull/52#issuecomment-651903746).

> As well as restricting who can merge, we also had to address a vulnerability with Integration Jenkins: someone without production access could manually trigger the CD pipeline by running the [`Deploy_App_Downstream` Jenkins job](https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-puppet/blob/c24ff191ce7fc8a38ceb464f0139faba04b9734b/modules/govuk_jenkins/templates/jobs/deploy_app_downstream.yaml.erb). In order to prevent this kind of unauthorised deployment, the job has additional checks:
> 
> - The tag to deploy must be the highest `release_123`-type tag.
> - The tagged commit must match the latest commit on the master branch.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
As well as restricting who can merge, we also have restrictions around which version of the code can be deployed. Only commits with latest release tag on the deployment branch can be automatically deployed. This protects against anyone in the integration environment triggering a potentially malicious deployment thats is not latest release. The following checks in the [`Deploy_App_Downstream` Jenkins job](https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-puppet/blob/c24ff191ce7fc8a38ceb464f0139faba04b9734b/modules/govuk_jenkins/templates/jobs/deploy_app_downstream.yaml.erb) enforce this restriction:

- The tag to deploy must be the highest `release_123`-type tag.
- The tagged commit must match the latest commit on the master branch.

However, the pipeline could still be abused by:

- By manually altering the job definition. In this scenario, anyone with non production access could deploy any version of the code to the Staging environment. (but no further: only people with production access can access the job in Staging Jenkins [1], which also does the above checks.)

- By repeatedly invoking the Deploy_App_Downstream job with the latest release, flooding the production environment with deployments. This could impact our production environment in various ways including creating a chain of graceful restarts, loss of worker capacity, delays to non-malicious deployments etc.
```

Author: Thanks @theseanything! I've gone with slightly different wording, partly to fix the typos, but mainly to try and clarify the latter point as an accepted/able risk, instead of focussing on the consequences. Here's the commit: https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-rfcs/pull/128/commits/037ffeab428caf76a013d001e57bbcb3e8b4fa10.

I still think it's worth continuing a discussion of potential ways to mitigate this risk, and I'd like to use the original thread for that, to keep it simple. So, I'll resolve this one.

- Look for any Icinga alerts related to the app.
- Check the [deployment dashboard for the app](https://docs.publishing.service.gov.uk/manual/deployment-dashboards.html).
- Generally make sure the change is tested.

We often defer to automated tests to tell us when something is broken, but it's unclear whether this is really justified: there is no minimum standard for testing of GOV.UK apps.

## Proposal

The obvious solution to the backlog of deployments is to make them automatic. This has already begun, as part of [a trial of Continuous Deployment](https://docs.google.com/document/d/18y2fLzqbHyTliThxuiyxKznDw4TZmPiQZAk-3rkgpBg/edit) and [a subsequent extension to include 5 more apps](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1YhgjJjDRB57-IlgPNAAZzFTI3jIUucGJKokti_lQiRQ/edit).

> **It is still possible to deploy an app manually.** The new pipeline is just an automation of the manual deployment steps. Rollback is unchanged, and freezing deployments is supported [[1](https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-puppet/blob/c24ff191ce7fc8a38ceb464f0139faba04b9734b/modules/govuk_jenkins/templates/jobs/deploy_app_downstream.yaml.erb#L22)].

> However, we have been unable to make further progress due to the other two issues: we are concerned that enabling automatic deployments en masse would lead to an increase in defects reaching production.

Reviewer 11: One last annoying nitpick 😅 

I'm not sure what the other "two" issues are here - there's only one concern after the colon.

I suggest:

```suggestion
However, we have been unable to make further progress due to the concern that enabling automatic deployments en masse would lead to an increase in defects reaching production.
```

Author: OK. I'll accept one more nitpick. I've pushed [a new commit](https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-rfcs/pull/128/commits/247a09a02ac6e3cacb7a5792da0c1b2b9602c758) to clarify it - slightly different to your suggestion, as I want to try and reference the previous section.

Reviewer 11: Ah, I see.

I think it would be easier to follow if the previous paragraph made it more obvious that it's referring back to one of the above issues. At the moment the reader needs to hold a lot of context in their head when they get to this "other two issues" statement, and it broke the flow for me.

I suggest changing this:

> The obvious solution to the backlog of deployments is to make them automatic

To this:

> The first issue (we have a constant backlog of deployments) has an obvious solution - make deployments automatic.

That provides a bit of a hint that when the next paragraph talks about "other issues" it's contrasting them with the "first issue" here. Otherwise you have to memorise the issues before you read this paragraph to be able to unpick what it means.

Sorry - this is totally a commentary on writing style, and has no bearing on the substance of the discussion 🤦.

Author: Sure, I did think that when I made the commit, so I've amended it as you suggested 👍. Can I resolve this now?

Reviewer 11: Yep! Thanks!

  - Comment on how the app meets the criteria of this RFC.

> **We can be flexible with coverage**. We can defer adding internal repo tests if the code has no impact on the running app e.g. rake tasks [[1](https://github.com/alphagov/email-alert-api/blob/59fc71a58317ef2998f2c0ef102020da3ca9df96/lib/tasks/support.rake)]. But we should not defer removing any unused code.

### Delete [publishing-e2e-tests](https://github.com/alphagov/publishing-e2e-tests)

In establishing the safety criteria for automatic deployments, we had to consider these tests. As explained in the rejected approaches, we chose to avoid them entirely. This brings their existence into question.

We believe these tests add little or no value to GOV.UK. They significantly reduce our agility by adding 5+ minutes onto every PR build, to the extent that we sometimes remove them as a required check. They have very significant maintenance issues and only ever break for reasons unrelated to the features they are testing. Despite these signficant problems, we invest very little effort in improving them, and actively avoid extending them.

> We will disable and delete these tests, along with all of their associated infrastructure [[1](https://github.com/alphagov/email-alert-api/blob/0b87e62288ddb1653451f84e1f36e17ce4e8e9dc/Dockerfile)] [[2](https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-app-deployment/blob/58fcfab4262da0ba06a568dd5e9bbd76be2f4f62/lib/docker_tag_pusher.rb)], once automatic deployments are enabled for [all of the supported apps](https://github.com/alphagov/publishing-e2e-tests/blob/8412c23c5907a41a3d8b2c9dcd52d4905b139e32/docker-compose.yml). At this point, we will have significantly improved the testing for these apps, to the extent that the cost of keeping the E2E tests is far greater than any protection we might get from them.

Reviewer 11: Small suggestion that just moves words around. I think this reads a bit more clearly:

```suggestion
Once automatic deployments are enabled for [all of the supported apps](https://github.com/alphagov/publishing-e2e-tests/blob/8412c23c5907a41a3d8b2c9dcd52d4905b139e32/docker-compose.yml) we will disable and delete these tests, along with all of their associated infrastructure [[1](https://github.com/alphagov/email-alert-api/blob/0b87e62288ddb1653451f84e1f36e17ce4e8e9dc/Dockerfile)] [[2](https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-app-deployment/blob/58fcfab4262da0ba06a568dd5e9bbd76be2f4f62/lib/docker_tag_pusher.rb)]. At this point, we will have significantly improved the testing for these apps, to the extent that the cost of keeping the E2E tests is far greater than any protection we might get from them.
```
